February 18, 2025 31 CommentsHow Phished Data T urns into Apple &
Google W allets
Carding — the underground business of stealing, selling and swiping stolen payment card data —
has long been the dominion of Russia-based hackers. Happily , the broad deployment of more
secure chip-based payment cards in the United States has weakened the carding market. But a
ﬂurry of innovation from cybercrime groups in China is breathing new life into the carding industry ,
by turning phished card data into mobile wallets that can be used online and at main street stores.
  3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 1/15An image from one Chinese phishing group’ s Telegram channel shows various toll road
phish kits available.
If you own a mobile phone, the chances are excellent that at some point in the past two years it
has received at least one phishing message that spoofs the U.S. Postal Service  to supposedly
collect some outstanding delivery fee, or an SMS that pretends to be a local toll road operator
warning of a delinquent toll fee.
These messages are being sent through sophisticated phishing kits sold by several
cybercriminals based in mainland China. And they are not traditional SMS phishing or “ smishing ”
messages, as they bypass the mobile networks entirely . Rather , the missives are sent through the
Apple iMessage  service and through RCS , the functionally equivalent technology on Google
phones.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 2/15People who enter their payment card data at one of these sites will be told their ﬁnancial
institution needs to verify the small transaction by sending a one-time passcode to the customer ’s
mobile device. In reality , that code will be sent by the victim’ s ﬁnancial institution to verify that the
user indeed wishes to link their card information to a mobile wallet.
If the victim then provides that one-time code, the phishers will link the card data to a new mobile
wallet from Apple or Google, loading the wallet onto a mobile phone that the scammers control.
CARDING REINVENTED
Ford Merrill  works in security research at  SecAlliance , a CSIS Security Group  company . Merrill
has been studying the evolution of several China-based smishing gangs, and found that most of
them feature helpful and informative video tutorials in their sales accounts on Telegram. Those
videos show the thieves are loading multiple stolen digital wallets on a single mobile device, and
then selling those phones in bulk for hundreds of dollars apiece.
“Who says carding is dead?,” said Merrill, who presented about his ﬁndings at the M3AA WG
security conference in Lisbon earlier today . “This is the best mag stripe cloning device ever . This
threat actor is saying you need to buy at least 10 phones, and they’ll air ship them to you.”
One promotional video shows stacks of milk crates stuf fed full of phones for sale. A closer
inspection reveals that each phone is afﬁxed with a handwritten notation that typically references
the date its mobile wallets were added, the number of wallets on the device, and the initials of the
seller .3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 3/15An image from the Telegram channel for a popular Chinese smishing kit vendor shows 10 mobile phones for sale, each loaded
with 4-6 digital wallets from dif ferent UK ﬁnancial institutions.
Merrill said one common way criminal groups in China are cashing out with these stolen mobile
wallets involves setting up fake e-commerce businesses on Stripe  or Zelle  and running
transactions through those entities — often for amounts totaling between $100 and $500.
Merrill said that when these phishing groups ﬁrst began operating in earnest two years ago, they
would wait between 60 to 90 days before selling the phones or using them for fraud. But these
days that waiting period is more like just seven to ten days, he said.
“When they ﬁrst installed this, the actors were very patient,” he said. “Nowadays, they only wait
like 10 days before [the wallets] are hit hard and fast.”
GHOST T AP
Criminals also can cash out mobile wallets by obtaining real point-of-sale terminals and using tap-
to-pay on phone after phone. But they also of fer a more cutting-edge mobile fraud technology:
Merrill found that at least one of the Chinese phishing groups sells an Android app called “ ZNFC ”3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 4/15that can relay a valid NFC transaction to anywhere in the world. The user simply waves their
phone at a local payment terminal that accepts Apple or Google pay , and the app relays an NFC
transaction over the Internet from a phone in China.
A Chinese phishing gr oup demonstr ates a "Ghost Tap" payment A Chinese phishing gr oup demonstr ates a "Ghost Tap" payment
“The software can work from anywhere in the world,” Merrill said. “These guys provide the
software for $500 a month, and it can relay both NFC enabled tap-to-pay as well as any digital
wallet. The even have 24-hour support.”
The rise of so-called “ghost tap” mobile software was ﬁrst documented in November 2024  by
security experts at ThreatFabric . Andy Chandler , the company’ s chief commercial ofﬁcer , said
their researchers have since identiﬁed a number of criminal groups from dif ferent regions of the
world latching on to this scheme.
Chandler said those include organized crime gangs in Europe that are using similar mobile wallet
and NFC attacks to take money out of ATMs made to work with smartphones.
“No one is talking about it, but we’re now seeing ten dif ferent methodologies using the same
modus operandi, and none of them are doing it the same,” Chandler said. “This is much bigger
than the banks are prepared to say .”
A November 2024 story in the Singapore daily The Straits Times  reported  authorities there
arrested three foreign men who were recruited in their home countries via social messaging
platforms, and given ghost tap apps with which to purchase expensive items from retailers,
including mobile phones, jewelry , and gold bars.
“Since Nov 4, at least 10 victims who had fallen for e-commerce scams have reported
unauthorised transactions totaling more than $100,000 on their credit cards for purchases such as
electronic products, like iPhones and chargers, and jewelry in Singapore,” The Straits Times
wrote, noting that in another case with a similar modus operandi, the police arrested a Malaysian
man and woman on Nov 8.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 5/15Three individuals charged with using ghost tap software at an electronics store in Singapore. Image: The Straits Times.
ADVANCED PHISHING TECHNIQUES
According to Merrill, the phishing pages that spoof the USPS and various toll road operators are
powered by several innovations designed to maximize the extraction of victim data.
For example, a would-be smishing victim might enter their personal and ﬁnancial information, but
then decide the whole thing is scam before actually submitting the data. In this case, anything
typed into the data ﬁelds of the phishing page will be captured in real time, regardless of whether
the visitor actually clicks the “submit” button.
Merrill said people who submit payment card data to these phishing sites often are then told their
card can’t be processed, and urged to use a dif ferent card. This technique, he said, sometimes
allows the phishers to steal more than one mobile wallet per victim.
Many phishing websites expose victim data by storing the stolen information directly on the
phishing domain. But Merrill said these Chinese phishing kits will forward all victim data to a back-
end database operated by the phishing kit vendors. That way , even when the smishing sites get
taken down for fraud, the stolen data is still safe and secure.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 6/15Another important innovation is the use of mass-created Apple and Google user accounts through
which these phishers send their spam messages. One of the Chinese phishing groups posted
images on their Telegram sales channels showing how these robot Apple and Google accounts
are loaded onto Apple and Google phones, and arranged snugly next to each other in an
expansive, multi-tiered rack that sits directly in front of the phishing service operator .
The ashtray says: You’ve been phishing all night.
In other words, the smishing websites are powered by real human operators as long as new
messages are being sent. Merrill said the criminals appear to send only a few dozen messages at
a time, likely because completing the scam takes manual work by the human operators in China.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 7/15After all, most one-time codes used for mobile wallet provisioning are generally only good for a
few minutes before they expire.
Notably , none of the phishing sites spooﬁng the toll operators or postal services will load in a
regular W eb browser; they will only render if they detect that a visitor is coming from a mobile
device.
“One of the reasons they want you to be on a mobile device is they want you to be on the same
device that is going to receive the one-time code,” Merrill said. “They also want to minimize the
chances you will leave. And if they want to get that mobile tokenization and grab your one-time
code, they need a live operator .”
Merrill found the Chinese phishing kits feature another innovation that makes it simple for
customers to turn stolen card details into a mobile wallet: They programmatically take the card
data supplied by the phishing victim and convert it into a digital image of a real payment card that
matches that victim’ s ﬁnancial institution. That way , attempting to enroll a stolen card into Apple
Pay, for example, becomes as easy as scanning the fabricated card image with an iPhone.
An ad from a Chinese SMS phishing group’ s Telegram channel showing how
the service converts stolen card data into an image of the stolen card.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 8/15“The phone isn’t smart enough to know whether it’ s a real card or just an image,” Merrill said. “So
it scans the card into Apple Pay , which says okay we need to verify that you’re the owner of the
card by sending a one-time code.”
PROFITS
How proﬁtable are these mobile phishing kits? The best guess so far comes from data gathered
by other security researchers who’ve been tracking these advanced Chinese phishing vendors.
In August 2023, the security ﬁrm Resecurity discovered a vulnerability  in one popular Chinese
phish kit vendor ’s platform that exposed the personal and ﬁnancial data of phishing victims.
Resecurity dubbed the group the Smishing T riad, and found the gang had harvested 108,044
payment cards across 31 phishing domains (3,485 cards per domain).
In August 2024, security researcher Grant Smith  gave a presentation  at the DEFCON security
conference about tracking down the Smishing Triad after scammers spooﬁng the U.S. Postal
Service duped his wife . By identifying a dif ferent vulnerability in the gang’ s phishing kit, Smith said
he was able to see that people entered 438,669 unique credit cards in 1,133 phishing domains
(387 cards per domain).
Based on his research, Merrill said it’ s reasonable to expect between $100 and $500 in losses on
each card that is turned into a mobile wallet. Merrill said they observed nearly 33,000 unique
domains tied to these Chinese smishing groups during the year between the publication of
Resecurity’ s research and Smith’ s DEFCON talk.
Using a median number of 1,935 cards per domain and a conservative loss of $250 per card, that
comes out to about $15 billion in fraudulent charges over a year .
Merrill was reluctant to say whether he’d identiﬁed additional security vulnerabilities in any of the
phishing kits sold by the Chinese groups, noting that the phishers quickly ﬁxed the vulnerabilities
that were detailed publicly by Resecurity and Smith.
FIGHTING BACK
Adoption of touchless payments took of f in the United States after the Coronavirus pandemic
emerged, and many ﬁnancial institutions in the United States were eager to make it simple for
customers to link payment cards to mobile wallets. Thus, the authentication requirement for doing
so defaulted to sending the customer a one-time code via SMS.
Experts say the continued reliance on one-time codes for onboarding mobile wallets has fostered
this new wave of carding. KrebsOnSecurity interviewed a security executive from a large
European ﬁnancial institution who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not
authorized to speak to the press.3/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 9/15A LITTLE SUNSHINE ALL ABOUT SKIMMERS THE COMING STORM WEB FRAUD 2.0
ANDY CHANDLER APPLE CSIS SECURITY GROUP FORD MERRILL GHOST TAP GOOGLE
GRANT SMITH IMESSAGE M3AAWG RCS RESECURITY SECALLIANCE SMISHING
THREATFABRIC ZNFCThat expert said the lag between the phishing of victim card data and its eventual use for fraud
has left many ﬁnancial institutions struggling to correlate the causes of their losses.
“That’ s part of why the industry as a whole has been caught by surprise,” the expert said. “A  lot of
people are asking, how this is possible now that we’ve tokenized a plaintext process. W e’ve never
seen the volume of sending and people responding that we’re seeing with these phishers.”
To improve the security of digital wallet provisioning, some banks in Europe and Asia require
customers to log in to the bank’ s mobile app before they can link a digital wallet to their device.
Addressing the ghost tap threat may require updates to contactless payment terminals, to better
identify NFC transactions that are being relayed from another device. But experts say it’ s
unrealistic to expect retailers will be eager to replace existing payment terminals before their
expected lifespans expire.
And of course Apple and Google have an increased role to play as well, given that their accounts
are being created en masse and used to blast out these smishing messages. Both companies
could easily tell which of their devices suddenly have 7-10 dif ferent mobile wallets added from 7-
10 dif ferent people around the world. They could also recommend that ﬁnancial institutions use
more secure authentication methods for mobile wallet provisioning.
Neither Apple nor Google responded to requests for comment on this story .
This entry was posted on Tuesday 18th of February 2025 01:37 PM
31 thoughts on “ How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google W allets ”
Sounds like if person has no digital wallet = safe from this scam.
I suspect they can make wallets as a victim with just a card by setting up a new phone account
as them. :/
I didn’t get that from the article. The attacker is the one setting up the wallet and linking it to the
card. They are triggering 2-factor and the victim gets a message and provides the 2nd factor for
the attacker to link the card to the attacker ’s wallet.Mahhn
February 18, 2025
BigP
-
February 18, 20253/5/25, 10:29 AM How Phished Data Turns into Apple & Google Wallets – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/how-phished-data-turns-into-apple-google-wallets/ 10/15