Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Internet Governance
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Information Policy Series
Edited by Sandra Braman
The Information Policy Series publishes research on and analysis of significant 
problems in the field of information policy, including decisions and practices that 
enable or constrain information, communication, and culture irrespective of the 
legal silos in which they have traditionally been located as well as state- law- society 
interactions. Defining information policy as all laws, regulations, and decision-  
making principles that affect any form of information creation, processing, flows, 
and use, the series includes attention to the formal decisions, decision- making 
processes, and entities of government; the formal and informal decisions, decision-  
making processes, and entities of private and public sector agents capable of consti -
tutive effects on the nature of society; and the cultural habits and predispositions 
of governmentality that support and sustain government and governance. The 
parametric functions of information policy at the boundaries of social, informa -
tional, and technological systems are of global importance because they provide the 
context for all communications, interactions, and social processes.
Virtual Economies: Design and Analysis , Vili Lehdonvirta and Edward Castronova
Traversing Digital Babel: Information, e- Government, and Exchange , Alon Peled
Chasing the Tape: Information Law and Policy in Capital Markets , Onnig H. Dombalagian
Regulating the Cloud: Policy for Computing Infrastructure , edited by Christopher S. Yoo 
and Jean- Fran çois Blanchette
Privacy on the Ground: Driving Corporate Behavior in the United States and Europe , Kenneth 
A. Bamberger and Deirdre K. Mulligan
How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the Soviet Internet , Benjamin Peters
Hate Spin: The Manufacture of Religious Offense and Its Threat to Democracy , Cherian 
George
Big Data Is Not a Monolith , edited by Cassidy R. Sugimoto, Hamid R. Ekbia, and 
Michael Mattioli
Decoding the Social World: Data Science and the Unintended Consequences of Communica -
tion, Sandra Gonz ález- Bail ón
Open Space: The Global Effort for Open Access to Environmental Satellite Data , Mariel 
John Borowitz
You’ll See This Message When It Is Too Late: The Legal and Economic Aftermath of Cyber -
security Breaches , Josephine Wolff
The Blockchain and the New Architecture of Trust , Kevin Werbach
Digital Lifeline? ICTs for Refugees and Displaced Persons , edited by Carleen F. Maitland
Designing an Internet , David D. Clark
Reluctant Power: Networks, Corporations, and the Struggle for Global Governance in the 
Early 20th Century , Rita Zaj ácz
Human Rights in the Age of Platforms , edited by Rikke Frank Jørgensen
The Paradoxes of Network Neutralities , Russell Newman
Zoning China: Online Video, Popular Culture, and the State , Luzhou Li
Design Justice: Community- Led Practices to Build the World We Need , Sasha Costanza- Chock
Fake News: Understanding Media and Misinformation in the Digital Age , edited by Melissa 
Zimdars and Kembrew McLleod
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Internet Governance
Methods, Frameworks, Futures
Edited by Laura DeNardis, Derrick L. Cogburn,  
Nanette S. Levinson, and Francesca Musiani
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025© 2020 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC BY-  NC-  ND license. Subject to such 
license, all rights are reserved.
The Open Access edition of this book was published with the support of a generous 
grant from the Hewlett Foundation Cyber Initiative to the Internet Governance Lab 
at American University.
This book was set in Stone Serif and Stone Sans by Westchester Publishing 
Services. 
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Names: DeNardis, Laura, 1966– editor. | Cogburn, Derrick L., editor. | 
 Levinson, Nanette S., editor. | Musiani, Francesca, editor.  
Title: Researching internet governance : methods, frameworks, futures / 
edited by Laura DeNardis, Derrick L. Cogburn, Nanette S. Levinson, and 
 Francesca Musiani.  
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, 2020. | 
Series: Information policy series | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2020000432 | ISBN 9780262539753 (paperback)  
Subjects: LCSH: Internet governance—Research. 
Classification: LCC TK5105.8854 .R47 2020 | DDC 384.3/34072—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020000432
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Series Editor’s Introduction     vii
Sandra Braman
 1 Introduction: Internet Governance as an Object  
of Research Inquiry     1
Laura DeNardis
 2 The Irony of Internet Governance Research: Metagovernance  
as Context     21
Sandra Braman
 3 Inventing Internet Governance: The Historical Trajectory  
of the Phenomenon and the Field     59
Milton L. Mueller and Farzaneh Badiei
 4 Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet 
Governance: Controversies and Infrastructures as  
Internet Politics     85
Francesca Musiani
 5 A Legal Lens into Internet Governance     105
Rolf H. Weber
 6 Web Observatories: Gathering Data for Internet Governance     123
Wendy Hall, Aastha Madaan, and Kieron O’Hara
 7 Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When  
Measuring Cybersecurity     145
Eric Jardine
 8 Researching Technology Elites: Lessons Learned from  
Data Collection at Google and Facebook     169
Rikke Frank JørgensenContents
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025vi Contents
 9 Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance 
Research: Computational Analysis of Transcripts from  
12 Years of the Internet Governance Forum     185
Derrick L. Cogburn
 10 Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through  
Mailing- List Analysis     213
Niels ten Oever, Stefania Milan, and Davide Beraldo
 11 The Biases of Information Security Research     231
Ronald J. Deibert
 12 The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative: A Discourse  
Analytical Approach     253
Jeanette Hofmann
 13 Toward Future Internet Governance Research and  
Methods: Internet Governance Learning     269
Nanette S. Levinson
Editors     295
Contributors     299
Index     305
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Becoming aware of a new subject that needs research is an intellectual chal -
lenge in its own right. Making it legible to others and developing a research 
agenda are even more so. Building out a field, for those subjects of research 
so broad, complex, and important that they deserve or require it, is a yet 
greater challenge by orders of magnitude.
Brian Kahin gets credit for the first round of making the subject of 
Internet governance research legible and stimulating the development of 
research agendas. As Founding Director of the Harvard Information Infra -
structure Project (1989– 1997), he organized a series of influential confer -
ences that produced, in turn, a series of edited or coedited books, including 
several with MIT Press: Public Access to the Internet  (1995), Standards Policy 
for Information Infrastructure  (1995), Borders in Cyberspace  (1997), Coordinat -
ing the Internet  (1997), and more. It was in Kahin’s conferences that Michael 
Goldhaber first introduced the concept of the attention economy, Jeffrey 
MacKie- Mason (now, as University Librarian at the University of California-  
Berkeley, famously providing leadership in the area of open access and the 
economics of scholarly publishing in the digital environment) discussed 
“unbundling” journal articles for separate sale of the elements, access to 
the Internet received the scholarly attention it deserved, the importance 
of standards and protocols came to be appreciated by a much wider group 
of thinkers than the very small group of cognoscenti historically involved, 
and many of us working on what we might otherwise have perceived as 
disparate research topics came to see the relationships among them all.
Laura DeNardis gets credit for the second round, currently underway, that 
has completed the task of establishing the field. Her own books are foun -
dational, always required reading, including those published by MIT Press: 
Protocol Politics  and the edited Opening Standards . Going further, though, Series Editor’s Introduction
Sandra Braman
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025viii Series Editor’s Introduction
in leadership positions that began with service as Director of the Yale Law 
School Information Society Project and went on to include being Director 
of Research for the Global Commission on Internet Governance as well as 
formal and informal advisor to a number of nonprofit and governmen -
tal organizations— positions that have offered opportunities to fund and 
otherwise support and inspire research— DeNardis has systematically built 
out the field. This is the second book produced by the editorial team she 
has recently pulled together to expand on the effort of conceptualizing the 
domain, a team that includes Francesca Musiani of the CNRS in France and 
DeNardis’s American University colleagues Nanette Levinson and Derrick 
Cogburn. The group’s first book addressed the Internet as infrastructure.
My own thoughts regarding where the field of Internet governance is 
going can be found in my chapter in this book. Here, the point is other: what 
it takes to make an all- important subject of research visible, help scholars 
develop their research agendas, and build a field. This collection stands on 
its own, with great value for students and scholars. It also marks the “com -
ing of age” of the field. The work does not claim to be comprehensive but, 
rather, to provide a sense of the range of the field, diverse ways of thinking 
about it, and examples of quite disparate types of research methods that 
can be used to study it.
Coeditor Levinson’s concluding chapter contextualizes the whole within 
the history of the sociology of knowledge, providing insight into the processes 
of learning about Internet governance in a manner that should be inspira -
tional for those considering joining this scholarly community as well as those 
who rely upon it in their own scholarship, research, and policy- making. The 
chapters by DeNardis and Mueller and Badiei, as well as my own, contextual -
ize the field relative to its own history and other bodies of knowledge.
We see how the field looks from the perspective of the law (Weber), 
science and technology studies (coeditor Musiani), and information secu -
rity (Deibert). There are exemplars of methods that range from text mining 
(coeditor Cogburn) and various types of technical analysis (Jardine; Deib -
ert; and Hall, Madaan, and O’Hara) to discourse analysis (ten Oever, Milan, 
and Beraldo; as well as Hofmann) and interviews (Jørgensen).
The collaborative and multinational nature of the editorial team, as well 
as the book’s authors and content, are indicators of the field’s evolution. We 
are far from done thinking about how to think about Internet governance 
research, but this is a very strong place to begin.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Why Study Internet Governance?
Governance of the Internet has quickly become one of the most pressing 
geopolitical issues of the contemporary era. How the Internet is designed 
and administered implicates a host of public policy concerns such as per -
sonal privacy, economic stability, national security, freedom of expression, 
and digital equality. Governments increasingly discuss issues of Internet 
governance and cybersecurity in the same breath as other types of global 
collective action problems such as terrorism, environmental protection, 
and human rights issues from poverty to child trafficking.
What was once an esoteric set of issues relegated to the technical com -
munity and a handful of scholars is now high on the policy agenda of all 
governments. The reasons for this escalation of interest in how the Inter -
net is administered are absolutely clear. The economic stakes of the digital 
economy are immense, with all industry sectors dependent on the Internet 
to function and digital trade measured in trillions of dollars annually. An 
outage in cyberspace is an outage of the global economy. Internet poli -
cies also profoundly affect individual civil liberties and political discourses 
around elections. Governments have recognized that Internet governance 
has become a proxy for state power in areas ranging from cyber conflict to 
systems of filtering and censorship.
A number of Internet conflicts covered extensively in the media— such 
as Edward Snowden’s disclosures about expansive government surveillance, 
massive data breaches, and Russian hacking during the 2016 US presiden -
tial election— have drawn public attention and scrutiny to questions about 
how the Internet is controlled and administered, whether by content inter -
mediaries like social media companies, by traditional governments, or by 1 Introduction: Internet Governance as an Object 
of Research Inquiry
Laura DeNardis
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 20252 L. DeNardis
new institutions designed to manage the security and stability of critical 
Internet resources.
Because of the high stakes of Internet governance questions, there is 
a tremendous interest in empirical scholarship that provides an evidence 
base for the decisions of policy makers and the private sector. There is 
equally a need for scholarship that makes visible to society the sinews of 
power constructing and controlling the Internet and explaining what the 
implications are for society and the economy.
There is also an epistemic community of scholars— highly interdisci -
plinary and distributed around the globe— that self- reflexively identifies 
as being a global Internet governance research community. The scholarly 
community has been increasingly organized, at least since the inception 
of the Global Internet Governance Academic Network (GigaNet) in 2006 
and since the rise of interdisciplinary centers on Internet policy, cyber gov -
ernance, Internet governance, and related initiatives at major universities 
around the world. Increasing numbers of graduate students, advocacy orga -
nizations, academic centers, policy makers, and new kinds of firms that 
recognize their own Internet policy challenges seek to better understand 
the choices and implications of how global digital networks are governed.
The defining and original feature of this book is that the topic is 
research concepts, methods, and frameworks. Numerous books (many by 
the authors in this book) contain state- of- the- art research on Internet gov -
ernance topics, rather than viewing Internet governance research as the 
topic. How to begin to study Internet governance? This chapter examines 
the following questions: What is the thing studied when one studies Inter -
net governance? What is the evidence base being examined? Who is study -
ing Internet governance, and what methodologies and conceptual lenses 
are instructive? This chapter also lays out the organization of the book’s 
chapters— contributed by leading scholars in fields as diverse as law, com -
puter science, communication, science and technology studies, and politi -
cal science. The rising stakes and increasing visibility of control struggles 
over Internet governance, as well as the coalescing and increasingly matur -
ing of an interdisciplinary field that epistemically describes what it is doing 
as Internet governance research, present an important moment of oppor -
tunity for this volume.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  3
What Is the Thing Studied When One Studies Internet Governance?
The Internet is and always has been governed, although not in the tradi -
tional sense of nation- state governance but in points of coordination and 
control that cross borders and are distributed among many actors, includ -
ing the private sector, traditional governmental structures, new global insti -
tutions, and sometimes, citizens themselves. Governance is not only about 
governments. It is enacted via technical design, resource coordination, pri -
vate ordering, and conflicts at control points.
Internet governance can be generally defined as the administration and 
design of the technologies that keep the Internet operational and the enact -
ment of policy around these technologies. Beneath the things that humans 
perceive— content, applications, and devices— when using a network, there 
are thousands of behind- the- scenes control points. There is no one ideal 
taxonomy for describing these many points of design, coordination, and 
control, but one way to organize the functions is as follows (see DeNardis 
2014; DeNardis and Musiani 2016):
• Administration of critical Internet resources such as names and numbers
• Establishment of Internet technical standards (e.g., protocols for address -
ing, routing, encryption, compression, error detection, identity systems, 
authentication)
• Coordination of access and interconnection (e.g., IXPs, net neutrality, 
access policies)
• Cybersecurity governance
• The policy- making role of private information intermediaries (e.g., via 
platform governance, algorithmic ordering, terms of service, computa -
tional ordering and decisions by artificial intelligence, and policies about 
security, speech, reputation, and privacy)
• Technical architecture- based intellectual property rights enforcement
These are all in themselves complex and multivariable points of control, 
and they overlap in many ways. Any of these tasks can be used to keep the 
Internet free and open; any can be exploited by governments or the private 
sector to enact censorship or carry out surveillance. This taxonomy, while 
capacious, actually bounds the scope of Internet governance as a target of 
research in important ways. For one, it clearly demarcates Internet gover -
nance from the enormous body of Internet studies focusing on how people, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 20254 L. DeNardis
businesses, and governments use the Internet, what they say on the Inter -
net (from the mundane to the political), or how user- centric questions such 
as identity and representation unfold. Those questions are the purview of 
the larger context of Internet research— obviously, not meaning how the 
Internet is used for research but meaning research about Internet usage 
(e.g., Markham and Baym 2008).
To oversimplify the distinction, whereas much of broader Internet research 
studies what people express on social media— such as content analysis of 
political expression on Twitter or issues of identity, representation for 
marginalized communities, or community formation— Internet gover -
nance research studies the mechanisms of control beneath the surface layer 
of content, such as algorithmic ordering, security, platform affordances, 
privacy policies instantiated in terms of service, mechanisms to detect fake 
bot accounts, and the regulatory contexts constraining or enabling all this. 
There is nothing natural about these distinctions, but there is pragmatic 
utility in bounding the scope of Internet governance.
As a prelude to interrogating Internet governance research, the following 
presents five distinguishing features about how the Internet is governed in 
practice: (1) Technical design and coordination decisions establish public 
policy. (2) Technologies of Internet governance, as currently designed, cross 
borders in a way that complicates nation- state jurisdiction. (3) Governance 
is distributed across multiple actors in a model usually described as private-  
sector- led, multistakeholder governance. (4) Internet security is both con -
verging and diverging with national security. (5) Internet infrastructure 
control is now a proxy for political and economic power. Some of these 
serve as points of reference for this book’s chapters, either as part of the 
conceptual framework or as concepts that are challenged and interrogated 
as Internet governance research enters its next stage.
Technical Design Enacts Governance
One distinguishing feature of the practice of Internet governance is that the 
design of technical architecture is a significant force enacting public policy. 
Therefore, a significant body of Internet governance research studies the 
underlying technologies of the Internet and how they are designed. For 
example, the technical design of the Internet’s domain name system (DNS) 
has constructed or enabled certain forms of governance both of the DNS 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  5
and by the DNS. As Bradshaw and DeNardis (2016) suggest, among other 
design features, the DNS embeds names (in the form of domain names) 
and therefore involves speech conflicts, its hierarchical design creates 
chokepoints at which content can be blocked, it involves a pool of finite 
resources (binary Internet addresses) and so raises issues of global distribu -
tion, and the requirement for unique names and numbers has necessitated 
centralized administration to ensure global uniqueness. Much prominent 
research has focused on the DNS and the systems of institutional control 
(e.g., the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers [ICANN], 
the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority [IANA], registries, registrars) 
around this system (e.g., Klein 2002; Kleinw ächter 2000; Mueller 2002; 
Paré 2003).
A significant Internet governance enterprise is the establishment of tech -
nical standards for universal formats for how to address, encode, compress, 
encrypt, and exchange information in a way that is interoperable with other 
devices and software that adhere to these standards. There are hundreds upon 
hundreds of core standards, but some of the most well- known are Wi- Fi, HTTPS 
(hypertext transfer protocol secure), VoIP (voice over Internet protocol), and 
Bluetooth. These specifications are set by many transnational technical insti -
tutions, such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), and the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF). Standards serve a technical function, but their design also estab -
lishes public policy. For example, interoperability standards allow economic 
competition among private actors and promote innovation and global inter -
connection. The strength of encryption standards establishes conditions for 
privacy. Web accessibility standards allow those with hearing, sight, move -
ment, or other impairments to use the Internet.
The technological affordances of information intermediary technologies 
also enact governance. Information intermediaries are the private platforms 
(e.g., social media platforms, search engines, messaging platforms, access 
providers, and cloud computing companies) that enable the exchange and 
aggregation of content. Design features such as tracking mechanisms, real-  
name identification requirements, and decisions about anonymity construct 
rights in the same way that the terms of service of these systems construct 
the conditions of individual civil liberties such as speech rights, privacy, 
and data ownership.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 20256 L. DeNardis
Cross- Border Technologies and Bordered Policy Often Conflict
Policy making that seeks to stay within national borders does not necessar -
ily stay within national borders. For example, the European Union’s General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) has affected companies that do business 
all over the world and has affected cross- border technologies such as the 
WHOIS system, a database of global registered domain holders. Local poli -
cies, such as the GDPR, the right to be forgotten rule, and data-  localization 
policies, have global effects because the underlying technologies of the 
Internet— interconnection points, cloud computing infrastructures, content 
distribution networks, the DNS— do not correspond to the borders of these 
local policies.
Yet one political reaction to the growth and success of the Internet, the 
technological reality of cross- border technologies, and the market reality of 
private companies shaping human rights online is the rise of cyber sover -
eignty approaches in which countries are seeking to exert greater control 
over the Internet. In many cases, they are seeking to impose nation- state 
borders over the distributed architecture of the Internet. Russia, China, and 
some other countries have been proponents of cyber sovereignty under the 
guise of social order, with China’s efficient system of content censorship 
and filtering perhaps the best example.
A long- standing debate in Internet governance involves those advocat -
ing for greater government control of the Internet, such as the cyber sov -
ereignty models, and those advocating for the preservation of technical 
governance that is distributed over actors including international organiza -
tions, traditional governance structures, the private sector, new global insti -
tutions, and civil society. This has led to many international governance 
controversies, from debates over international telecommunications regula -
tions at the International Telecommunication Union’s World Conference 
on International Telecommunications in Dubai in 2012 to the controversial 
and long- coming transition of power from the US Commerce Department 
to ICANN in overseeing the IANA functions.
While the Internet has always been subject to national statutory con -
texts, its distributed architecture and other technical features make imple -
menting individual national laws difficult in practice. Transnational private 
companies have to deal with unique legal requirements in all the markets in 
which they operate or even simply where users might access their services. 
Governments are also increasingly establishing policies that place constraints 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  7
on technical infrastructure arrangements. For example, relatively new data-  
localization laws are in place from Russia to Latin America to Asia that place 
restrictions on how customer information is stored, often requiring data to 
reside on servers within a country’s borders. These policies affect not only 
traditionally tech companies but any company (e.g., financial services, 
retail) that stores customer data. Some of these policies arose over concern 
about citizen privacy and foreign surveillance, but they create complications 
from an engineering, human rights, and business model standpoint. Con -
centrating data in one place can actually make it more difficult to protect 
personal privacy. These requirements also do not map onto the distributed 
technical design of the Internet or the ways in which content delivery net -
works (CDNs) decentralize and distribute data around the world. This is one 
example of the tension between national governance contexts and the dis -
tributed nature of the Internet.
The Privatization of Governance and the Multistakeholder Model
The term “Internet governance” is, in some ways, an oxymoron. The power 
to control and govern the Internet is distributed among private industry, 
global institutions like ICANN and the IETF, and in some cases by civil 
society, as well as by governments. This form of distributed governance is 
often called multistakeholder governance and involves functions such as 
technical- architecture- based enforcement of intellectual property rights, the 
private policies of technical intermediaries, the administration of the DNS 
and Internet names and numbers (i.e., IP addresses), cybersecurity coor -
dination, and the establishment of Internet standards. Collectively, these 
tasks keep the Internet operational and enact policies that directly establish 
the conditions of innovation and civil liberties in the digital sphere.
A major line of inquiry in Internet governance studies involves questions 
about the nature and legitimacy of multistakeholder governance arrange -
ments and the appropriate balance of powers among actors at the various 
layers of Internet coordination. Frankly, it is not yet a well- understood or 
much- analyzed framework of governance. There are many models and 
many contexts of multistakeholder governance. Drawing from John Rug -
gie’s pioneering study of multilateralism, Raymond and DeNardis (2015) 
offer a taxonomy of different types of multistakeholder institutional forms 
that vary according to what combination of actor class is participating and 
the nature of the authority relations among these actors. The international 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 20258 L. DeNardis
relations scholar Joseph Nye Jr. describes Internet governance as a “regime 
complex,” applying regime theory to Internet governance to explain the 
constellation of institutions, actors, norms, and policies that collectively 
constitute distributed, multistakeholder governance. As Nye explains, Inter -
net governance involves “a set of loosely coupled norms and institutions 
that ranks somewhere between an integrated institution that imposes regu -
lation through hierarchical rules, and highly fragmented practices and insti -
tutions with no identifiable core and non- existent linkages” (Nye 2014, 9).
A critical point for understanding Internet governance is that there is not 
a single system of oversight and coordination but an entire constellation 
of functions, each overseen by different governance structures distributed 
over one or more actors. Collectively, this administration and coordina -
tion of the technologies necessary to keep the Internet operational and the 
heterogeneous policies enacted around these technologies is viewed as dis -
tributed, multistakeholder governance, even if in practice multistakeholder 
arrangements rarely match the rhetoric around multistakeholderism. Thus, 
scholars study the policy- making role of private industry (DeNardis 2014; 
Gillespie 2014; MacKinnon 2011), national and international law (Gold -
smith and Wu 2006; Weber 2010), technical coordination institutions 
(Klein 2002; Kleinw ächter 2000; Mathiason 2008; Mueller 2002), interna -
tional organizations (Levinson and Marzouki 2015), and as mentioned in 
the previous section, technical design itself (Braman 2011; DeNardis 2009).
Internet Security Is Converging and Diverging with National Security
There has long been a peculiar rhetorical distinction between “cyber” and 
“Internet” for historical and cultural reasons beyond the scope of this book. A 
person using the term “cyber” often refers to cybersecurity or national secu -
rity domains of Internet warfare and international relations. Using “Internet” 
refers to either digital economy issues, the free and open Internet, or the Inter -
net of Things (IoT).
From an engineering perspective, the distinction makes no sense, because 
the underlying infrastructure is the same, and when using “Internet gov -
ernance” this book does not imply a distinction between cyber issues and 
Internet issues. They are the same.
It may be helpful, however, to acknowledge the ways in which the dis -
courses and communities of practice around these nomenclatures are both 
converging and diverging, because this helps illustrate another feature of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  9
Internet governance: that points of control are points of mediation between 
often- conflicting values.
Internet security and national security, on one hand, are converging 
because the stability of the economy, democracy, and public sphere is now 
completely predicated on Internet stability and security. Every sector of the 
global economy is digitally mediated and in some way connected to the pub -
lic Internet. Security breaches have significant effects on basic societal func -
tioning. Ransomware attacks have cryptographically locked and therefore 
crippled health care systems until the affected institutions succumb to pay -
ing ransom, usually in the form of Bitcoin. High- profile, massive consumer 
data breaches such as those at Equifax, Target, and the Office of Personnel 
Management have chilling effects on citizen trust in the digital economy 
and sometimes chilling effects on speech and behavior online. Even more 
significant, the proliferation of the IoT raises the stakes for security because 
an outage or disruption of cyber- physical systems can mean the loss of life 
and not just loss of access to communications. Stable systems of democracy 
also increasingly require strong cybersecurity, considering the stunning dis -
closure by US intelligence agencies about Russian probing of voter rolls and 
other cyber incursions during the 2016 US presidential election.
On the other hand, cybersecurity and national security are diverging. Other 
security trends, such as governmental stockpiling of zero- day exploits and the 
rise of cyber offensive capabilities such as the Stuxnet code targeting Iranian 
nuclear reactors, speak to cyber as the fifth domain of warfare and the emerg -
ing front for conflict between nation- states. The need for strong security 
for the digital economy and for individual privacy and trust in cyberspace 
comes into conflict with national security requirements for law enforce -
ment, intelligence gathering, and the amassing of cyber offense capabil -
ity. The clash of market- driven trends toward greater encryption with law 
enforcement requirements for access to data materialized in the aftermath 
of the San Bernardino, California, terrorist attack when authorities sought 
access to an encrypted Apple smartphone belonging to the attacker. Values 
are always in tension around Internet control points.
Control of Internet Governance Infrastructure Is a Proxy  
for Political Power
Global conflicts over control of cyberspace have existed at least since the 
commercialization and internationalization of the Internet. One prominent 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202510 L. DeNardis
example was the long- standing geopolitical contention over the US Com -
merce Department oversight of names and numbers, including its contrac -
tual arrangement with ICANN and authority over changes to the root zone 
file, until this unique US coordinating function was transitioned to the global 
multistakeholder community. As the Internet’s importance to the economy 
and the political sphere has increased, so has contention over the infra -
structure of the Internet.
Governments and other forces recognize that power over technical infra -
structure points of control can serve as a proxy for control of ideas, the 
economy, and the political sphere (DeNardis 2012; Musiani et al. 2016). For 
example, the DNS has become a tool of content control— for example, used 
by China’s extensive censorship system and used to block access to sites 
that illegally share pirated content or sell counterfeit products. Encryption 
standards and implementations, historically always politically charged, have 
increasingly become targets of governments wishing to weaken or create back -
doors to cryptography for national security or intelligence purposes, in some 
cases pitting law enforcement values against the need to provide strong secu -
rity for the digital economy. As with all areas of Internet governance, battles 
over control of infrastructure are sites of conflict among competing values 
and interests.
The Ensuing Challenge to Internet Governance Scholarship
The preceding five themes in Internet governance practice translate directly 
into challenges, ab initio, for Internet governance research. A goal of this 
book is to demonstrate how to overcome clear research challenges in study -
ing Internet governance.
Making the invisible visible . The technical architectures and institutions of 
governance are not visible in the same way that Internet content and usage 
is visible to end users. Scholarship has to excavate and make visible these 
hidden infrastructures, in some cases, before research even commences.
Understanding complex technologies . Studying the design and governance 
of the Internet requires understanding the underlying technologies. Tech -
nologies of Internet governance include thousands of protocols, platforms, 
algorithms, systems of routing and interconnection, the DNS, encryption stan -
dards, the Internet of things, and public key cryptography and other authen -
tication mechanisms. These systems constitute the underlying infrastructure 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  11
supporting both cyberspace and the integrated cyber- physical world. The 
application of machine learning and artificial intelligence as mechanisms of 
governance further complicates the topic of study. This complexity of tech -
nologies either enacting governance or being governed requires scholars, 
regardless of discipline, to have a proficient technical understanding of how 
stuff works.
The difficulty in studying the private sector . The private sector owns and 
operates the vast majority of the Internet’s infrastructure and platforms, 
further complicating access to data and sometimes concealing technology 
in proprietary enclosure such as algorithms protected by trade secrecy or 
standards- based patents.
Navigating conflicting values . Because Internet governance points of con -
trol are increasingly political points of control, scholarship about these 
conflicts often takes on a normative stance. Even the choice of what to 
study in Internet governance intervenes. Almost every question of Inter -
net governance embeds conflicting values, such as law enforcement versus 
individual civil liberties, privacy versus free speech, technical expediency 
versus security, surveillance capitalism versus privacy, and consumer safety 
in the IoT versus economic competition. Is a universal and interoperable 
Internet desirable or does a fragmented Internet that, for example, isolates 
industry- specific IoT applications have advantages? Even if objectivity in 
research is possible, Internet governance research, especially considering 
the high stakes to society, often involves some type of a normative stance, 
such as the assumption that a free and open Internet is desirable.
Multistakeholder governance and multistakeholder research . Because of how 
technology crosses borders and because even local governance decisions 
can have global effects, studying any one actor or issue area can sometimes 
miss important contextual or empirical factors. At the same time, collabora -
tive research initiatives that combine input from actor classes have promise 
for tackling very large issue areas.
Overstudying open systems . The traditions of Internet governance in prac -
tice have been generally open in that dominant coordinating institutions 
like the IETF and ICANN allow participant observation and have made pro -
ceedings and mailing lists generally accessible relative to other more insu -
lar institutions. Because of the availability of more data, these institutions 
and underlying systems are asymmetrically overstudied relative to systems 
involving greater proprietary enclosure. The institutions that are more 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202512 L. DeNardis
closed, including consortia and institutions in many emerging areas of 
technology, are very difficult to study.
Research often involves creation of technological tools . Because of the massive 
size and complexity of Internet infrastructure, as well as the need to some -
times digitally reach across borders to gather data, research often involves 
software mediation and the coproduction of technological tools. This is 
especially the case for studies that assess politically motivated outages and 
cybersecurity incursions but also for studies of how traffic flows through 
interconnection points and for large- scale network analysis of all kinds.
Who Studies Internet Governance and How Do They Study It?
Internet governance researchers excavate and examine the invisible Internet 
control points and the social, economic, and political implications of these 
control points. Internet governance research, commensurate with Internet 
governance itself, is hardly a monolithic practice but, rather, made up of 
discipline-independent but interacting fields as well as intrinsically interdis -
ciplinary fields such as science and technology studies and communication 
studies.
The methodological approaches and tools are diverse: large- scale text 
analysis, network analysis, traditional statistical methods, discourse anal -
ysis, participant observation, interviews, and ethnomethodologies of all 
kinds. Even among this diversity, there is clearly an epistemic community 
of interdisciplinary scholars who have studied dimensions of Internet gov -
ernance for decades but perhaps most visibly coalescing with the founding 
of the GigaNet in 2006 just before the inaugural United Nations Internet 
Governance Forum in Athens. In other words, scholars from law, econom -
ics, history, political science, science and technology studies, sociology, and 
beyond self- reflexively situate what they are doing as Internet governance 
research.
Because of the technical complexity of systems of Internet architecture 
governance, many of these scholars have a strong background knowledge 
in computer science, engineering, information technology, and specific 
expert knowledge about the Internet’s underlying technical architecture. 
Indeed, this technical expertise, even when one studies laws (about tech -
nology), institutions (that design and administer technology), or private 
ordering (the companies that own and operate the Internet).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  13
Research is often policy engaged or policy adjacent. Internet governance 
researchers are interested in real- world problems and the opportunity for 
creating an evidence base for policy decisions. Not surprisingly, policy ini -
tiatives have directly engaged researchers and commissioned work on spe -
cific topics. For example, the Global Commission on Internet Governance, 
a two- year initiative chaired by Carl Bildt, a former prime minister of Swe -
den, included the global, interdisciplinary Research Advisory Network that 
produced more than 50 original research papers in six research volumes 
on cybersecurity, fragmentation, access and interconnection, and more 
(Global Commission on Internet Governance 2016– 2017).
A related feature of this research is that it sometimes overlaps with the 
practice of Internet governance. Scholars have been actively involved as 
participants in ICANN working groups, contributing to standards- setting 
initiatives, moving between higher education and policy appointments, 
serving as advisors to policy makers, and sometimes serving as consultants 
to industry. This translational and pragmatic role of some scholars is similar 
to scholarly engagement in other topical disciplines that engage in great 
problems in contemporary society.
One could divide Internet governance research in many ways— disciplinary 
approach, topical area of study, research methodology, or thematic or con -
ceptual framework. The editors of this volume choose to highlight some 
disciplinary perspectives on studying Internet governance. Although a wide 
variety of fields— from computer science to political science to science and 
technology studies— are included in this book, it is of course a single volume 
and thus not sufficiently inclusive of all disciplines. The authors were selected 
according to who could provide a diversity of perspectives and are influential 
Internet governance thought leaders in their respective fields.
The book commences with historically grounded chapters by two experts 
in Internet governance and communication policy. In chapter 2, “The Irony 
of Internet Governance Research: Metagovernance as Context,” the infor -
mation policy expert Sandra Braman sets the stage by broadly defining 
Internet governance as including “not only efforts to regulate institutional, 
communal, and individual practices, content, and uses by geopolitically 
recognized governments but also decision- making and efforts with regula -
tory effects by private sector entities, whether those that have a legal status 
(such as third- party intermediaries that have legal identities as corpora -
tions) or those that do not (such as autonomous networks).”
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202514 L. DeNardis
Her chapter then situates questions of Internet governance in the longer 
trajectory of network regulation and socio- technical governance and explains 
how Internet governance entanglements are challenging concepts such as 
liability, governance, the rule of law, and the state. In chapter 3, “Inventing 
Internet Governance: The Historical Trajectory of the Phenomenon and the 
Field,” Milton Mueller and Farzaneh Badiei examine the emergence and tra -
jectory of Internet governance as a label, as an area of scholarly study, and 
as a real- world policy arena and explore the interplay among these spheres.
To policy makers and some scholars, Internet governance is too often 
exclusively understood through institutional lenses— governments, private 
companies, systems of politics, international organizations, ICANN, the IETF, 
and so on— with less attention to the agency and affordances of technol -
ogy itself. The Internet at its core is a collection of technologies— protocols, 
routing and addressing infrastructures; physical equipment like fiber- optic 
cable, antennas, switches, and interconnection sites; algorithm- driven plat -
forms; the DNS; applications; code; firewalls; encryption; and the like. 
Arrangements of technology are also arrangements of public policy. Not 
surprisingly, then, the field of science and technology studies (STS) has 
been influential in examining and making visible the reciprocal relation -
ship between, on one hand, technologies of Internet governance and archi -
tecture and, on the other, society and the economy. Francesca Musiani 
explains the contributions and perspective of STS in chapter 4, “Science 
and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance: Controver -
sies and Infrastructures as Internet Politics.” The chapter pays particular 
attention to how studies of controversies contribute to understandings of 
Internet governance. Most notably, and speaking to the urgent need to 
look beyond institutional frames, Musiani explains how STS perspectives—  
and especially approaches to infrastructure studies— examine the agency 
of nonhuman actors and the mediating governance role of infrastructure.
Some of the early US legal writing about Internet policy, such as Law -
rence Lessig’s influential book Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace  (1999), 
conceptually followed STS themes, especially highlighting the ways in 
which technical architecture (as well as law, norms, and markets) shapes 
and constrains society. As the Internet became commercialized and global -
ized, legal scholars have continued to produce important Internet gover -
nance work on every imaginable subtopic of Internet governance, whether 
trademark concerns in the DNS, intellectual property rights protection 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  15
online, or privacy laws. One of the challenges inherent in legal studies of 
Internet governance is that Internet technologies and institutions do not 
neatly reside within national borders. In chapter 5, “A Legal Lens into Inter -
net Governance,” legal scholar Rolf H. Weber helps explain the challenges 
and the ensuing considerations of legal harmonization, legitimacy, and 
multistakeholder legitimacy in spheres of Internet governance.
The perspectives of computer scientists have contributed greatly to under -
standings of how the Internet is controlled and what is at stake. This book 
includes a chapter from a prominent team of computer science researchers 
from the Web Science Institute at the University of Southampton: Wendy 
Hall, Aastha Madaan, and Kieron O’Hara. In chapter 6, “Web Observatories: 
Gathering Data for Internet Governance,” they take up the question of the 
study of governance over the flow of data and content in the web ecosystem. 
They discuss the challenges of developing and re- creating methods for ethi -
cal and secure data gathering and sharing, and they propose an architecture 
for doing so.
Policy makers rely (or should rely) on analysis of empirical data in all 
areas of Internet policy, including cybersecurity, but sometimes these data 
(and analyses) can be inadequate to reliably inform policy- making deci -
sions. Quantitative political science research sheds light on Internet gover -
nance trends and problems. One challenge in this arena is that the thing 
being studied continually expands and changes, making examinations 
intrinsically multivariable and also difficult to replicate as data change. The 
political science professor Eric Jardine takes up these challenges in chapter 
7, “Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cyber -
security.” Jardine addresses the lack of statistical normalization and other 
challenges such as the failure to control for “lurking confounders.”
Another question in Internet governance research is how to study the 
private sector, which owns and operates the majority of cyber infrastructure 
and establishes policies through design of systems, terms of service, and insti -
tutional decisions that, in effect, govern. These private intermediaries include 
social media platforms, Internet service providers, content distribution net -
works, cloud computing providers, private DNS resolution providers, and 
many other categories of industry. An entire generation of doctoral student 
researchers across various disciplines is interested in studying this privatiza -
tion of Internet governance instantiated in the decisions of intermediar -
ies. Carrying out research projects about the privatization of governance 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202516 L. DeNardis
is challenging because it requires access to often closed and possibly even 
trade- secrecy- protected data.
The methods for studying the surface area of content are well established, 
but there is much more research fluidity and difficulty in studying what is 
beneath content, the hidden mechanisms and sinews of power control -
ling the flow of content and establishing conditions for human rights and 
innovation. For example, interviews with leading thinkers from the private 
sector sometimes are governed by nondisclosure agreements, underlying 
algorithms and other control mechanisms are protected by trade secrecy 
laws, and infrastructures are increasingly shrouded in proprietary enclo -
sure. The Danish human rights researcher Rikke Frank Jørgensen takes up 
the question of studying Internet governance by private intermediaries in 
chapter 8, “Researching Technology Elites: Lessons Learned from Data Col -
lection at Google and Facebook.”
Studying content itself, however, is a critical area of Internet governance 
research and one that involves enormous data stores: media coverage of 
Internet governance topics, terms of service, deliberations about Internet 
governance, and so on. There are enormous quantities of text that can help 
elucidate Internet governance problems, understandings and misunder -
standings, and solutions. Thus, research that uses text mining contributes 
greatly to examining the Internet governance ecosystem. Derrick Cogburn 
addresses this topic in chapter 9, “Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in 
Internet Governance Research.” He studied 12 years of transcripts of the UN 
Internet Governance Forum to illuminate core themes and issues over time 
and determine the utility of text mining and big data analytics in Internet 
governance research on all topics, from censorship to cybersecurity.
The sheer volume of deliberations and discussions that feed into deci -
sions about the design and administration of Internet architecture is mas -
sive. Because of the traditions of openness, transparency, and participation 
in Internet design communities, much (but not all) of this deliberation 
happens in the open and is archived in mailing lists, meeting minutes, and 
other online repositories. The Internet governance scholars Niels ten Oever, 
Stefania Milan, and Davide Beraldo address the topic of mailing- list research 
in chapter 10, “Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing-  
List Analysis.” The authors explain the utility of and opportunity for inter -
rogating mailing- list archives and propose a mixed- methods approach, a 
hybrid of computational and interpretive tasks.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  17
Arguably the most societally consequential area of inquiry around gov -
ernance of the Internet is cybersecurity. The global economy is completely 
digitally mediated and therefore dependent on the security and stability of 
networks. Privacy requires strong encryption. Consumer safety now depends 
on security of the IoT. Democracy requires not only secure voting systems 
but secure voter rolls and email. Free speech requires circumvention tools 
that provide freedom from filtering and censorship. Web queries require 
public key encryption. Online transactions require strong authentication. 
The study of cybersecurity governance is possibly the most critical area of 
Internet governance research because every other area depends on the secu -
rity and stability of networks. The leading Internet governance researcher 
in this area is probably Citizen Lab director Ron Deibert, whose work has 
been groundbreaking because it has required the development of new tech -
nical tools as part of researching Internet governance. In chapter 11, “The 
Biases of Information Security Research,” Deibert raises a critical point: 
even a highly technical area such as cybersecurity is politically contested 
and shaped by a constellation of economic and social factors that construct 
what research gets done. Chapter 11 raises questions of epistemology as 
much as methodology.
Dominant Internet governance discourses, as they have been constructed 
by those with a stake in the outcome of many tangible policy debates, have 
ideologies. For example, China and Russia have increasingly espoused an ide -
ology of cyber sovereignty that advocates for strong nation- state control of 
the Internet in the name of order and as a reflection of authoritarian tenden -
cies toward information and communication technologies. In the West, the 
collective coordinating tasks that keep the Internet operational have been 
cast, with some descriptive accuracy, as private- sector- led, multistakeholder 
Internet governance. But in the same way that cyber sovereignty embeds 
an ideology and privileges an approach, multistakeholder governance advo -
cacy has been adopted as a way, for some, to oversimplify Internet gover -
nance as a monolithic practice or to preserve hegemonic power for dominant 
institutions.
In chapter 12, “The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative: A Discourse 
Analytical Approach,” a leading Internet governance scholar, Jeanette Hof -
mann, examines how narratives and imaginaries, including those emanat -
ing from academic research, are significant constructors of policy discourses. 
As Hofmann suggests, there is often a disconnect between expectations of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202518 L. DeNardis
multistakeholderism and how this model performs in practice. She explains 
how discursive representations of such concepts in Internet governance, 
including those coconstructed by the academic community, take on vari -
ous utilities. The chapter addresses a critical subject but also helps empha -
size the place of discourse analysis in Internet governance scholarship.
The book concludes with chapter 13, “Toward Future Internet Gover -
nance Research and Methods: Internet Governance Learning,” in which 
Nanette Levinson draws from related research arenas to elucidate what 
foundations can inform the future of Internet governance research and 
methods.
Both “Internet” and “governance” are malleable terms whose meanings 
are in flux, especially as it becomes more and more difficult to define what 
the Internet is, whether based on underlying technical architecture, user 
communities, or underlying values. More “users” are bots and things than 
people. More networks increasingly depend on proprietary protocols, espe -
cially in cyber- physical systems, rather than open protocols such as TCP/
IP (transmission- control protocol/Internet protocol). The Internet in China 
bears no resemblance to the Internet in Sweden. Acknowledging the spec -
trum of technologies, the conflicts between values, and the fragmentation 
of the Internet that already exists does not negate the descriptive reality of 
the present moment. The constellation of governance and control issues 
around the Internet now determines conditions of privacy, speech, innova -
tion, and the security and stability of the digital economy. Internet gover -
nance researchers seek to shed light on these critical decision points that 
will shape society for an entire generation.
References
Bradshaw, S., & DeNardis, L. (2016). The politicization of the Internet’s domain 
name system: Implications for Internet security, universality, and freedom. New 
Media & Society, 20 (1), 332– 350.
Braman, S. (2011). The framing years: Policy fundamentals in the Internet design 
process, 1969– 1979. The Information Society, 27 , 295– 310.
DeNardis, L. (2009). Protocol politics: The globalization of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeNardis, L. (2012). Hidden levers of Internet control: An infrastructure- based 
theory of Internet governance. Information, Communication & Society, 15 (5), 720– 738.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Internet Governance as an Object of Research Inquiry  19
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Musiani, F. (2016). Governance by infrastructure. In F. Musiani, 
D. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The turn to infrastructure in Internet 
governance . New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.
Gillespie, T. (2014). The relevance of algorithms. In T. Gillespie, P. Boczkowski, & 
K. Foot (Eds.), Media technologies: Essays on communication, materiality, and society  
(pp. 167– 194). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2016, December 7). A universal Internet 
in a bordered world: Research on fragmentation, openness and interoperability  (Research 
Vol. 1). Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / publications / universal - internet  
- bordered - world - research - fragmentation - openness - and - interoperability
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2017, January 7). Who runs the 
Internet? The global multi- stakeholder model of Internet governance  (Research Vol. 2). 
Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / publications / who - runs - internet - global  
- multi - stakeholder - model - internet - governance
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2017, May 8). Mapping the digital 
frontiers of trade and intellectual property  (Research Vol. 3). Retrieved from https://  
www . cigionline . org / publications / mapping - digital - frontiers - trade - and - intellectual  
- property
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2017, June 23). Designing digital free -
dom: A human rights agenda for Internet governance  (Research Vol. 4). Retrieved from 
https:// www . cigionline . org / publications / designing - digital - freedom - human - rights  
- agenda - internet - governance
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2017, July 26). Cybersecurity in a vola -
tile world  (Research Vol. 5). Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / publications  
/ cyber - security - volatile - world
Global Commission on Internet Governance. (2017, July 26). The shifting geopolitics 
of Internet access: From broadband and net neutrality to zero- rating  (Research Vol. 6). 
Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / publications / shifting - geopolitics - internet  
- access - broadband - and - net - neutrality - zero - rating
Goldsmith, J., & Wu, T. (2006). Who controls the Internet? Illusions of a borderless 
world . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Klein, H. (2002). ICANN and Internet governance: Leveraging technical coordina -
tion to realize global public policy. The Information Society, 18 (3), 193– 207.
Kleinw ächter, W. (2000). ICANN between technical mandate and political chal -
lenges. Telecommunications Policy, 24 (6– 7), 553– 563.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202520 L. DeNardis
Lessig, L. (1999). Code and other laws of cyberspace . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Levinson, N. S., & Marzouki, M. (2015). IOs and global Internet governance inter -
organizational architecture. In F. Musiani, D. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson 
(Eds.), The turn to infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 47– 72). New York, NY: 
Palgrave MacMillan.
MacKinnon, R. (2011). Consent of the networked: The world- wide struggle for Internet 
freedom . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Markham, A., & Baym, N. (Eds.) (2008). Internet inquiry: Conversations about method . 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mathiason, J. (2008). Internet governance: The new frontier of global institutions . New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Mueller, M. (2002). Ruling the root: Internet governance and the taming of cyberspace . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Musiani, F., Cogburn, D., DeNardis, L., & Levinson, N. S. (Eds.). (2016). The turn to 
infrastructure in Internet governance . New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.
Nye, J. S. 2014. The regime complex for managing global cyber activities . Global Com -
mission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 1). Centre for International 
Governance Innovation/Chatham House.
Paré, D. (2003). Internet governance in transition . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Raymond, M., & DeNardis, L. (2015). Multistakeholderism: Anatomy of an inchoate 
global institution. International Theory, 7 (3), 572– 616.
Weber, R. H. (2010). Shaping Internet governance: Regulatory challenges . Berlin, Ger -
many: Springer.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Even though reality
may not exist,
we have a right to it.1
Information policy— laws and regulations pertaining to any aspect of infor -
mation creation, processing, flows, and use or, more colloquially, law and 
policy for information, communication, and culture— matters because it cre -
ates the context within which all other decision- making takes place. Internet 
governance, a form of information policy, matters in particular: it provides 
the context for much of that context, as the Internet is a “pan- medium” 
(Theall 1999), infrastructure for all forms of communication previously 
mediated by distinct technologies for which, historically, laws and regula -
tions were differentially developed, interpreted, and applied. Critically, “all 
other decision- making” includes the processes of governance themselves.
At the close of the second decade of the 21st century, when profound 
challenges to rule of law are underway around the world, Internet gover -
nance researchers must grapple with the effects of the uses of this socio-  
technical system— and of decisions about what those uses might be, how 
they might proceed, and what the consequences are likely to be— on gov -
ernance itself. This chapter situates Internet governance research relative to 
the nature of governance and metagovernance more broadly, taking steps 
toward a research agenda by identifying questions raised by these develop -
ments. Additional theoretical and conceptual work is needed to provide a 
foundation for analysis of dimensions not historically considered but fun -
damental to arguments and operations in a world of algorithmic agency 
and digital structure.2 The Irony of Internet Governance Research: 
Metagovernance as Context
Sandra Braman
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202522 S. Braman
The chapter concludes with a few thoughts on humility, which brings 
us to irony; in Samuel Beckett’s (1953/2012) words, “I can’t go on, I’ll go 
on.” Bob Jessop (2016) uses the term “irony” to refer to analyzing, mak -
ing, and implementing policy in the face of knowledge that, ultimately, all 
governance efforts will fail. For those who study network policy, his use of 
the concept appropriately resonates with Robert Britt Horwitz’s The Irony 
of Regulatory Reform  (1989), a model of network policy analysis that is fully 
imbued with the role of networks as agents as well as subjects of power, 
deeply involved in transformations of the state.
The Internet and Governance
Relationships between the Internet and governance go both ways. As 
DeNardis and Musiani (2016) succinctly put it, there is governance of the 
Internet, and there is governance by the network. The latter includes struc -
turational and constitutive effects of Internet design and policy, whether 
direct and evident or indirect and needing analysis to become visible, as 
well as uses of the Internet as policy tools. The same elements can serve 
both “governance of” and “governance by” functions (Merrill 2016).
Many of the questions those involved in Internet governance engage are 
not new. Some are. It can take deep knowledge of history to know which 
questions are which; neither legal nor discursive silos help. In one example 
of their cost: the first edition of the Tallinn Manual  (Schmitt 2013), the 
NATO- sponsored effort by international legal experts to determine whether 
and how existing international law pertains to cybersecurity and cyberwar -
fare, ignored network- specific treaties altogether. By the time of the second 
volume, Tallinn Manual 2.0  (Schmitt 2017), the experts involved had appar -
ently been exposed to Anthony Rutkowski’s (2011) history of the treatment 
of what we now call cybersecurity issues beginning with the first interna -
tional telecommunications treaties in the mid- 19th century. Including this 
domain of international law in the Tallinn 2.0  analysis affected a number of 
conclusions reached, but that came several years after the first volume had 
been released to inform other national and international decision- making.
Whether the questions Internet governance researchers face are new and 
unique to the context or not, the conditions of the world for which deci -
sions are being made are qualitatively new in many ways, some of which 
we are only now beginning to discover and others of which are yet to come 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  23
or may remain indiscernible. Even before the turn toward political extrem -
isms of the first decades of the 21st century, the conditions under which we 
operate, and how we operate, had been changing in often radical ways and 
becoming increasingly turbulent— so much so that political scientists feel 
driven to add the prefix “meta- ” to the words they are using as they think 
about what is going on. Whether the conversation starts with what is hap -
pening to the state (government), or whether it starts from what governs 
in a particular area of social life (governance), it leads to metagovernance. 
Indeed, as Meuleman (2008) demonstrates, quite different intellectual tra -
ditions wind up in essentially the same place in this regard. Metagover -
nance involves establishing system parameters and determining what can 
happen within and between systems. Information policy, including Inter -
net governance, is inherently parametric policy, a matter that Lawrence 
Tribe (1985) notes makes it constitutional in nature within US law and that 
Jessop (2011) identifies as so important that engagement with parametric 
issues is itself one of the five types of metagovernance in his handbook 
chapter on that concept. It includes material as well as normative struc -
tures, making Internet governance infrastructure in this additional way for 
all other forms of metagovernance and governance, too.
The keystone works on the state and governance of recent years referred 
to in this chapter were published before the 21st century ruptures in coun -
tries around the world. That does not lessen our responsibilities as Internet 
governance researchers. This section looks briefly at some of the theoretical 
literatures that have been or could be useful for thinking about Internet 
governance within the larger context of the evolution of forms of gover -
nance and metagovernance before turning to the regime theory that is 
important to several other chapters of this book— and at its limits.
Theoretical Context
This is a world in which theoretical pluralism is not only preferred but a 
necessity. Jessop (2016) presents several theoretical approaches to study of 
the state, all of which he argues have validity and importance. We should 
not expect the directions in which things evolve to be singular. At their 
extremes, as Marshall McLuhan notes, the effects of the use of information 
and communication technologies can simultaneously be opposite in nature 
(McLuhan and McLuhan 1992). Where there are singularities, rationalities 
can bifurcate (DeLanda 1991). The causal processes that get us from here to 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202524 S. Braman
there are not necessarily linear, despite either desire or perception (Martine 
1992). Where positivists would look for determinism, matters may well be 
stochastic. Policy concepts that have been useful in the social environment 
may not be so on the technical side, or may yield quite different outcomes 
(Edwards and Veale 2017).
The characteristics that make informational metatechnologies such as 
digital technologies qualitatively distinct from modern technologies and 
premodern tools (Braman 2002) have transformed the nature of the mat é-
riel through which system transformations take place (Archer 1982, 1984; 
Giddens 1984) to such an extent that whether something is agent or struc -
ture can often now be a matter of choice. This identifies an Internet gover -
nance research agenda of its own. We have long been aware of the agency/
structure choice when it comes to intellectual property rights, a domain in 
which manufacturers can often put the same capacities into either software 
or hardware, respectively relying on either copyright or patent for protec -
tion. David D. Clark (2018) identifies and explains other significant areas 
in which the option is available in ways that have governance implications 
as we work on the “future Internet.”
McKelvey’s (2018) work on daemons, a concept important in technical 
design of what we now call the Internet from the earliest years of that pro -
cess (Braman 2011), draws our attention to network potentialities that are 
unseen and unknown for most users, latent until they become active. This 
gives us a user- , rather than network- , oriented approach to thinking about 
the technical environment and what it is like to live as a human within a 
world of algorithms. The development of positive policy recommendations 
for a daemon- filled world of the type described by McKelvey leads in the 
direction of capabilities, so persuasively introduced to information policy 
by Julie Cohen (2012). There is work to be done here.
Regime Theory
The regime theory relied upon by a number of authors in this book was 
developed by political scientists as a way of thinking about international 
relations in issue areas where things were generally working but for which 
there was no existing international law— and, when it came to digital net -
work matters, often no existing national law, either. The rising salience of 
such issues was reflected by policy analysts, many of whom shifted their 
attention from government to governance during the 1990s (Bache et al. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  25
2015). Working with the framework as classically presented by Krasner 
(1983), Cowhey (1990) was the first to explicitly use regime theory in anal -
ysis of telecommunications policy. Mueller’s (2004) work comparing the 
Internet and satellite governance mechanisms provides another example 
in network policy terrain. It is useful in analysis of a number of specific 
information policy issues raised within the context of the Internet as well 
(Braman 2004a, 2004b). Drezner (2009) and Nye (2014) are frequently 
referred to by those who explicitly apply this approach to Internet gover -
nance. Although regime theory was initially conceived of in regard to inter -
national relations, it has been taken up for use at other levels of social and 
governance structures, all the way down to the municipal level (Coletta and 
Kitchin 2017)— also matters of Internet governance because, as we know 
from Star and Ruhleder (1996), it is in its local manifestations that infra -
structure comes into existence. It would be valuable to have a mapping of 
the multiple levels at which regime formation and transformation are now 
taking place in ways that are pertinent to— or comprise— Internet gover -
nance across all these levels.
A corollary of regime theory is that private sector agents are explicitly and 
openly— rather than begrudgingly, critically, and/or with hesitation— included 
within policy analysis. International law firms, hired to craft contracts for 
network- reliant and globally active clients, were already playing significant 
roles in thinking about legal arrangements for transnational digital informa -
tion flows in the 1980s (see, e.g., Bruce, Cunard, and Director 1986), influ -
encing public law affecting the Internet in inevitably path- dependent, if not 
precedential, ways. A related set of processes was underway in the network-  
intertwined industry of finance (Dezalay and Garth 1996). What would the 
kind of analysis undertaken by Dezalay and Garth on finance yield if under -
taken on the role of such players in Internet governance?
As regime experience accumulates, working rules can become formal law, 
and norms can become foundational or operational principles. The kinds of 
learning Levinson talks about in her concluding chapter 13 of this book are 
among those involved. How do formal processes of Internet- specific insti -
tutions impede or encourage such learning? How useful is regime theory 
under conditions in which learning does not apply, whether because it is in 
a postlaw rather than prelaw context, or because rule of law has collapsed?
Regime theory involves governance under conditions of invention, 
evolution, or transition that can reify, whether as laws and regulations of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202526 S. Braman
geopolitically recognized states or through other means. Regime theorists 
typically assume incremental change in political and legal conditions, and 
that what are perceived to be very rare possibilities need not be taken into 
account. We now know, though, that change can be radical rather than 
incremental, sudden rather than slow, and that the outlier possibility may 
be the one we have to live with. Those doing Internet governance research 
need to be thinking about what happens under conditions of exception, of 
crisis, of turbulence, and of chaos. What role does Internet governance play 
in abuses of human rights and civil liberties? What roles might it play in 
preventing or mitigating such abuses? The burgeoning global community 
of researchers focused on resilience should be an important venue, and set 
of collaborators, for Internet governance researchers. The UN Sustainable 
Development Goals are now commonly being taken into account across 
issue areas; how might that be done with Internet governance research, fol -
lowing in the footsteps of Rajnish et al. (2017)?
Implications for Internet Governance Research
These elements of the theoretical context for Internet governance research 
make the terrain for this book’s authors a set of “meta” questions. What 
kind of research do we need to help design infrastructure for imagining, 
desiring, and creating governance systems for the world that we irrevoca -
bly, and together, now inhabit? How can we understand effects of policy 
decisions that are stochastic and iterative in nature, much like financial 
derivatives, with declining degrees of confidence in predictability? How 
should we govern governing? The next section provides some foundational 
definitions for addressing such questions.
Definitional Basics
The concepts of the Internet and of Internet governance are addressed here. 
Discussion of the intervening concept of governance includes attention to 
metagovernance as well.
Internet
I join Abbate (2017) and Russell (2017) in the analysis that we are near -
ing the end of the period during which the concept of the Internet is the 
dominant frame for policy and/or many other purposes. (Because there are 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  27
those who perceive themselves not to be on the Internet but on Facebook 
or some other platform, the extent to which this already affects percep -
tions of Internet governance matters among users. The ways in which they 
become involved in governance would be an interesting research question.) 
But I also agree with Hofmann, in chapter 12, and with Jessop (2016), in 
his work on the semantics of governance, that there are political power and 
policy efficacy in rhetorical frames and narratives. Thus I also take the posi -
tion that thinking in terms of Internet governance will continue to have 
utility even as the actual network merges with material, biological, and 
social environments. That leaves us with two definitional problems— which 
legal history pertains, and how do we know when what is being regulated 
is communication and therefore fundamentally a matter of human rights 
and civil liberties?
The editors of this volume, like those of the journal Internet Histories  
(Brügger et al. 2017), are to be lauded for not only acknowledging but also 
actively encouraging appreciation of the multiplicities of the technological 
realities and experiences of the Internet. There are times, though, when 
which history is being privileged matters. It is this that is the foundational 
question in the network neutrality battle being played out in the United 
States. Ithiel de Sola Pool’s seminal book Technologies of Freedom  (1983)—  
which argues that, as different legal systems converge to cope with the con -
vergence of computing and communication technologies, it is likely that 
the most repressive features of each would dominate in the new system 
that will emerge— explains how the trifold technological history (print, 
telecommunications, and broadcasting) yielded three different regulatory 
systems in the US by the time that government began to deal with digi -
tization. Two of them, systems with very different regulatory approaches, 
have both been discussed as providing the history of the Internet for the 
purposes of network neutrality and other regulation. Additional legal his -
tories are available when the Internet is approached from perspectives that 
are not oriented around communication. It would be the separate histories 
of currency, finance, and capital that apply to what has been described 
as “the internet of money” (Libra Association Members, n.d.), a suite of 
offerings that includes cryptocurrency and the associated financial services 
Facebook and a group of corporations that at launch included Mastercard, 
Visa, Spotify, Uber, and Lyft have been promoting. Starting from finance 
rather than communication frames Internet governance histories in ways 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202528 S. Braman
that preference values oriented around capital rather than human rights or 
citizenship. Similar stories can be told for every other government around 
the world.
As Abbate (2017) points out, how Internet governance is defined is itself 
a political question precisely because it determines which histories per -
tain, “ideology in practice” (Gurumurthy and Chami 2016, 1). This is not 
just inherent in the design process, but is also a matter of deliberate effort: 
“Internet governance technologies not only embed political values in their 
design and operations but are increasingly being co- opted for political pur -
poses irrelevant to their primary Internet governance function” (DeNardis 
2012, 721). Which histories should provide the frame for Internet gover -
nance? Should different histories serve as foundations for diverse dimen -
sions of the problem? Is it useful to incorporate historical pluralism as well 
as theoretical pluralism in Internet governance research?
Policy analyses in any specific area can often be greatly enriched by look -
ing across diverse regulatory systems for the various ways in which the same 
type of problem has been addressed. One example: the issue of who con -
trols the interface between private and public environments has arisen for 
both material and electronic networks, but the policy discussions for each 
have taken place within different legal silos and have not cross- referenced 
each other despite the shared features of the problem. On the material side, 
in the United States, treatment of mailboxes was a matter of constitutional 
law; on the electronic side, attachments to customer premises equipment 
are matters of administrative law, regulated by the Federal Communica -
tions Commission (FCC). Debates over the latter, which launched the lib -
eralization of telecommunications regulation in the United States in the 
1970s, were intense but never referred to the constitutional issues, although 
arguments made and principles used in constitutional law would have been 
pertinent in ways that have become ever more obvious.
The Internet border gateway protocol (BGP), critical to relations within 
and between the autonomous systems of which the Internet is made and 
thus key to human rights issues such as efforts to censor or shut down 
national networks altogether (Vargas- Leon 2016), is different in many ways 
from either the physical or electronic predecessor issues, but the discus -
sions on these matters went on for a long time, arguments were presented 
from a wide range of perspectives, and there is a great deal that could be 
learned for the toolbox of concepts and possibilities to consider for Internet 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  29
governance. Not every argument will transfer, but it is also likely that many 
will, as adapted or reoperationalized for the context. The point is not spe -
cific to the border gateway protocol.
Crawford (2007) prescriptively suggests that the Internet governance 
conversation should meld with the general domain of communication law 
and policy. If that is so, there is still the difficulty of deciding when Internet 
governance issues should be decided in light of fundamental constitutional 
principles and human rights law, justified when the network is understood 
to be about communication, arguably balanced differently against other 
needs when what is at stake is a transaction or a weapon. We are a couple of 
decades now into struggles over treating software as speech (see, e.g., Burk 
1997; Coleman 2009) and are beginning to see the literature using speech-  
related arguments in analyses of autonomous entities such as robots (see, 
e.g., Bambauer 2017; Calo, Froomkin, and Kerr 2016). Quite aside from 
what speech rights would inhere to autonomous digital agents should they 
be granted any form of citizenship status, there is no obvious limit to the 
range of types of digital information collection, processing, and flow issues 
to which free speech analyses might be applied.
A look at the many and diverse ways in which US lawmakers and regula -
tors have historically tried to bound the field of communication, published 
not long after the beginning of the 21st century, concluded that the most 
useful means of doing so for this technological era would be to treat media 
policy as those matters that mediate the nature of the public itself— who 
and what it is, the conditions under which members of the public can dis -
cuss together shared matters of public concern, and to which information 
members of the public have access upon which to base their discussions 
(Braman 2004c). That would not be a bad place to begin to think about how 
to draw boundaries regarding what should be considered to be communica -
tion for the purposes of Internet governance research, with the important 
caveat that it is now clear that several additional dimensions of analysis, 
discussed below, would need to be added to evaluate whether any given 
design decision, regulation, or content policy is now required.
Governance
A handbook by political scientists on governance opens by defining the 
concept in very general terms: “Theories and issues of social coordination 
and the nature of all patterns of rule” (Bevir 2011, 1). This is the broadest 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202530 S. Braman
of possible approaches, including theories and practices that increasingly 
involve governance as hybrid and multijurisdictional, populated by a plu -
rality of stakeholders who engage with each other via networks. A synthesis 
of the governance literature as it has developed to include metagovernance 
refers to it as the coordination of structures and practices that themselves 
are involved in coordinating social relations marked by complex, recipro -
cal interdependence (Jessop 2011). Metagovernance can be unbundled into 
first- order efforts involving one form of metagovernance, and second- order 
activities that involve multiple forms of metagovernance.
Law (1992, 382) memorably describes governance as “an effect generated 
by heterogeneous means.” The comment is not just accurate and witty but 
also has an implication that is profound: Governance is always emergent , in the 
specific sense in which that concept is understood within complex adaptive 
systems theory— an emergent system is one that cannot be explained at any 
other than the system level, rather than by the operations of any of its parts. 
Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani (2016) go further, arguing that by defini -
tion all the specifics of governance can not be identified; that is, governance is 
fully recognizable only post hoc — by the time you see it, it is in place. (Josephine 
Wolff [2018] titled her book on the cybersecurity dimensions of Internet gov -
ernance You’ll See This Message When It Is Too Late .) This post hoc feature of 
visibility makes preemption, as understood theoretically by Brian Massumi 
(2007), particularly important. From this perspective, the comment from 
Karl Rove, aide to President George W. Bush, regarding the “reality- based 
community” may be not a cynical throwaway but an empirical description 
of importance to researchers, courts, physicians, and others oriented around 
the facts. As it was first published in The New Yorker  by the reporter to whom 
the statement was given:
The aide [Rove] said that guys like me [the reporter] were “in what we call the 
reality- based community,” which he defined as people who “believe that solutions 
emerge from your judicious study of discernible reality.” … “That’s not the way the 
world really works anymore,” he continued. “We’re an empire now, and when we 
act, we create our own reality. And while you’re studying that reality— judiciously, 
as you will— we’ll act again, creating other new realities, which you can study too, 
and that’s how things will sort out. We’re history’s actors … [ellipsis in original] and 
you, all of you, will be left to just study what we do.” (Suskind 2004)
Jessop (2011) argues that governance inevitably fails, appearing to be 
successful only when dilemmas are framed so that negative, sometimes 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  31
catastrophic, consequences are beyond the spatiotemporal horizons of vis -
ibility. Each of these categories of dilemma frames suggests a research pro -
gram for those studying Internet governance. Corporation Schlumberger 
intentionally designed instruments and information collection practices for 
oil and gas exploration to be deceptive to governments, customers, and the 
public with respect to just which information was actually being collected, 
playing with such horizons of visibility for persuasive and operational pur -
poses (Bowker 1994). What would such social technologies and practices 
look like in the domain of Internet governance? Over time, government 
structure and departmental or agency design can function as spandrels, anal -
ogous to architectural features that were once structurally necessary but 
that are now available for aesthetic, rhetorical, or other purposes (Braman 
2006). Which features of Internet governance might be in use as spandrels, 
making it appear as if something presented is offered because it is consid -
ered desirable by users, the public, or policy makers when in reality it is 
something else, as well as or instead, that may for producers or others be 
the real point? In what ways can or does Internet governance make use 
of the spandrels of national, regional, and other governments? Are there 
equivalents to these questions regarding spandrels as they would apply to 
the corporate decision- making so important to Internet governance?
There has been so much scholarly discussion about changes in the 
nature of the state since the 1970s that it is actually identifiable as a distinct 
literature, on changing states. Three streams in this literature have arisen 
over time (Bevir and Rhodes 2011). The first engages the networked state 
as it has been practiced and understood by the late 1980s (see Antonelli 
1988), a form in which the multiplicity of networked relations at every 
level of the governance structure creates an environment in which the state 
can no longer exercise power unilaterally. The second involves work on 
metagovernance, theories about ways in which the state continues to exert 
control in the networked environment by managing the multiple processes 
in play. The third loosened the sense of state control even further, focus -
ing on “decentered governance,” abandoning both governance and gov -
ernment in favor of attention to how individuals and elites exercise power 
in an environment framed more in terms of ethnically based nationalisms 
than the bureaucratic dimensions that typically characterize analyses of 
states. This sense of the decline in the effectiveness of governments has 
been expressed in various ways. Jessop (2004) discusses governance in the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202532 S. Braman
shadow of government. For Bovaird (2005), it is governance without gov -
ernment. For Bevir and Rhodes (2011), the stateless state. Arguments can 
be made that there are areas of Internet- based activity that may be beyond 
our ability to govern at all (Braman 2015).
Under these conditions, it is reasonable to ask whether continuing to 
engage in policy making and analysis is meaningful. Jessop suggests the 
concept of “collibration” to refer to a variety of techniques that govern -
ments use in situations in which there would otherwise be regulatory fail -
ure. He likes that concept because it works across types of policy tools and 
processes, but this is an area in which there has been a lot of creativity. 
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD 
2018) offers a variant in its report on science, technology, and innovation, 
another area of information policy that Antonelli (2017) argues falls within 
the domain of Internet governance because of the network’s importance to 
knowledge production and knowledge production’s importance to society, 
the economy, and governance writ large. The OECD report uses the term 
“concertation” to similarly refer to efforts to hold things together that are 
so various in kind, so multiple in number, and so distributed across levels 
of the social structure, levels of the governmental hierarchy, and geography 
that effective management would in reality, most experienced practitio -
ners and observers believe, be a rank impossibility. The performative value 
of theoretical work is being emphasized throughout this essay, but it has 
its limits. Asserting new concepts in any area is no guarantee it will make 
things happen. It is this recognition of the limits of one’s efficacy in the 
face of expected failure that leads Jessop (2011) to insist that one principle 
for successful metagovernance should be “requisite irony,” to which this 
chapter returns in its conclusion.
There is a substantial literature further articulating governance concep -
tually and analyzing it in various contexts to which references here and in 
other chapters in this book will point the reader. One takeaway from this 
work for those doing Internet governance research would be to abandon 
the sense of exceptionalism that continues to hover, even if more faintly 
than before, over the research community. Continuing to learn about other 
domains in the manner modeled by Raymond and DeNardis (2015) is not 
only valuable for analysis of these matters as they pertain to the Internet, 
but is the only way to fully understand the role that Internet governance 
plays in larger governance and metagovernance processes.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  33
A second takeaway is the importance of acknowledging developments in 
the systems with which those involved in Internet governance are engag -
ing. Easy assumptions cannot necessarily be made about which countries 
fall into which category when it comes to characterizing their political 
nature, for example. Jessop’s authoritative work on theories of the state 
published in 2016 still refers to the United States as a liberal democracy, 
even though earlier work of his describes exactly the steps through which 
the political affairs of 2020 are unfolding with prescient clarity. There are 
extreme developments in many other countries around the world. Long-  
standing assumptions underlying political, legal, and policy analyses need 
to be unearthed and questioned or the analyses of Internet governance 
researchers, too, will be limited to historical matters.
Internet Governance
Musiani (2015) provides a valuable review of the literature on conceptual -
izations of Internet governance. This chapter is placed within a simplified 
typology of types of definitions that has a core shared across all types of def -
initions, the most narrow  approach, applying only to management of the 
network itself. From this perspective, exemplified by Mueller and Badiei in 
chapter 3, Internet governance is the responsibility of those global institu -
tions explicitly created for that policy purpose and devoted to it— ICANN, 
the Internet Engineering Task Force, the Internet Architecture Board, and 
related entities. An intermediate  definition of Internet governance would add 
“uses” to the subjects of governance and the national institutions responsible 
for the Internet in their countries, such as the Russian Runet as imagined in 
the “Internet isolation” ( Moscow Times  2019)— or “reliable Internet” (Tass 
2019)— bill of 2019. The approach offered by DeNardis in chapter 1, build -
ing on her earlier work with Musiani, in my view relies on an intermediate 
definition. I use a broad  definition of Internet governance that includes 
not only efforts to regulate institutional, communal, and individual prac -
tices, content, and uses by geopolitically recognized governments but also 
decision- making and efforts with regulatory effects by private sector enti -
ties, whether those that have a legal status (such as third- party intermediar -
ies that have legal identities as corporations) or those that do not (such as 
autonomous networks).
There are two different ways of seeking the literature in a given pol -
icy area. One is to bound the domain through the lens of a specific term 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202534 S. Braman
or set of terms (focusing on words used). Mueller and Badiei in chapter 3 
use this approach to analyze the history of the Internet governance lit -
erature. Browne’s (1997) approach to defining “information policy” does 
the same with that related and pertinent concept. At the opposite end of 
the spectrum, the domain can be bounded conceptually and theoretically, 
irrespective of the terminology used by various authors to refer to elements 
of the domain. My approach to defining information policy represents this 
end of the spectrum for that concept (Braman 2006), and a similarly broad 
approach to bounding the domain of Internet governance is used here.
Searching on the phrase “Internet governance” to locate literature on 
the subject will be most successful with the narrowest definition, though 
that still will not yield a comprehensive view of the pertinent literature 
because other terms continue to be used to refer to the same sets of institu -
tions, functions, and activities. It will have some but less utility with an 
intermediate definition. Searching on that phrase will be least successful 
with the broadest definitional approach, missing a great deal in the per -
tinent literatures. Use of the narrowest approach is most valuable within 
academia (where resource battles begin by bounding turf, with its genu -
ine implications for things such as faculty positions and budgets) and, 
of course, operationally for those involved in Internet- specific decision-  
making processes. Intermediate approaches can have enormous utility for 
analytical purposes. General public discourse about Internet- policy- related 
matters and the experience of individuals, communities, and organizations 
typically use the broadest approach, so in my view that can be particularly 
valuable for outward- facing communications of academics in addition to 
its heuristic and analytical value.
Thus, here “Internet governance” includes uses (and users), decision-  
making by general- purpose policy- making entities (e.g., geopolitical govern -
ments) and by those specific to the Internet (e.g., ICANN), and decision- making 
and structurational actions by private and public sector entities, daemons 
and humans, through informal and formal, transient and fixed, means. 
This is the same approach taken in a mid- 1990s bibliographic essay on the 
streams of literature in areas of the law that were coming together into 
an identifiable field of Internet policy (Braman 1995), much as happened 
with the microeconomics of information and the macroeconomics of the 
information economy (Braman 2005), with two differences: today Internet-  
specific entities loom much larger, both in the pertinent literatures and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  35
in my thinking, and we are now using the frame of algorithms to address 
issues in this space as well.
What we think of as Internet governance issues will remain of central 
importance even when the term “Internet” itself has become a limited ref -
erent for the intelligent network environment within which we govern and 
are governed, and even when we are talking about metagovernance in all 
its versions rather than only governance. It has value because it keeps our 
attention on the range of existing decision- making venues from the global 
to the local, is a constant reminder to think about interactions among the 
effects of different decisions and policies, offers a singular lens onto com -
plex interactions among many policy issues, and provides a valid umbrella 
for the range of types of decision- making venues, processes, stakeholders, 
and effects involved. Finally and importantly, thinking in terms of Internet 
governance justifies reliance on constitutional principles and international 
human rights law. It is not coincidental that David Kaye, the UN special 
rapporteur for freedom of expression, titled his 2019 book Speech Police: 
The Global Struggle to Govern the Internet . Rebecca MacKinnon used her 2012 
book title to emphasize the importance of including Internet users in the 
network’s governance if there is to be adequate concern for human rights 
and civil liberties: Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for Inter -
net Freedom .
Internet Governance and the State
Of the five trends in Internet governance Laura DeNardis discusses in chap -
ter 1, two involve challenges to the state. The first, one of the most impor -
tant arguments in that chapter, starts from the perspective of the state: 
Internet security and national security are diverging as well as converging. 
The second starts from the side of Internet governance: turning on their 
head usual analyses of legal globalization that start with the state, DeNardis 
describes laws and regulations of geopolitically recognized states as “bor -
dered policy,” with borders that are not always and in all ways contiguous 
with those of the networks being governed.
There are myriad types of states and theories about them (Held 1989), 
with social science interest in them rising and falling. As Jessop (2016, 1) 
notes, “here as in other fields, it seems that social scientists do not so much 
solve problems as get bored with them.” The theories matter, though, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202536 S. Braman
because they not only reflect but also effect transformations in the nature 
of the state— so much so that Jessop insists conceptualizations of the state 
are among the core elements of the modern state, along with territory, state 
bureaucracy and resources, and the population. The same can be said for 
the ideas of governance and metagovernance. Jessop explores what he calls 
the historical semantics of the modern state, including the vocabulary used 
by theorists to describe and discuss the state and the roles of those con -
ceptual frames in shaping the nature of the state and its practices. Using 
different language, Hofmann’s chapter 12, on rhetorical functions that 
are served by decision- making structures and organizational forms, makes 
related arguments, as do ten Oever (2019) and Milan and ten Oever (2017) 
in their analyses of what activists and advocates do on the ground.
This section looks at two among the ways in which Internet governance 
is inextricably implicated in challenges to the state— treatment of borders, 
and the development of alternative governance forms. There is insufficient 
room here to explore additional important dimensions of these relation -
ships and tensions as they pertain to rule of law and citizenship. Concep -
tual and methodological limits raised by such issues are discussed in the 
next section.
Borders of the State
Social and technical discussions of Internet governance have long been 
absorbed in the particular issues raised by borders, often but not only as 
they present in the form of jurisdictional dilemmas. On the social side, there 
has been work by legal scholars (classics include Burk 1997; Froomkin 1997; 
Johnson and Post 1996; and Zittrain 2005), many of whom felt the impor -
tance of the topic could not be overestimated; in Reidenberg’s (2005) view, it 
would be on such issues that rule of law in Internet governance would rise or 
fall. The border- defining Internet governance issues that are the most famil -
iar involve the domain name system (DNS) (Bradshaw and DeNardis 2018).
On the technical side, the first reference in the technical document 
series that is both medium for and documentation of the design process, 
the Requests for Comments (RFCs), to jurisdictional issues was when those 
responsible for design of what we now call the Internet were making the first 
international connection, to Norway, in 1972 (NORSAR n.d.). A decade later, 
it was argued that no technical restrictions on transborder email should be 
allowed that are any different in kind from those used with physical mail 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  37
(the question involved encryption), and it was suggested that, when Internet 
design and architecture come into conflict with the law, governments should 
change their laws to solve the problem (RFC 828 [Owen 1982]). Other bor -
der issues that came up in the first decades, each launching ongoing design 
debates and efforts, included identity certification procedures (e.g., RFC 1114 
[Kent and Linn 1989]), addressing (e.g., RFC 1218 [North American Directory 
Forum 1991]), and network security (e.g., RFC 1244 [Holbrook and Reynolds 
1991]). By the close of the 1980s, discussion in RFCs included references to 
comparative legal scholarship (e.g., RFC 1135 [Reynolds 1989]).
The question of how to think about the boundaries of the geopolitical state 
in network terms has always been a challenge. Rutkowski (2011) provides an 
invaluable history of what we think of as cybersecurity principles, beginning 
with how they were first used in treaties dealing with postal systems and 
semaphore networks long before the digital era. Provisions included such 
things as exchanging network architecture and addressing information, data 
retention, authentication of messages of governments, and filtering of harm -
ful messages. Among the principles to which almost every country in the 
world was a signatory at the time of his analysis are not only the proactive 
requirement to ensure communications security (a contemporary concern 
in the international legal community because of the question of how much 
a government needs to know regarding what flows through networks that 
cross its geographic territory), but also the rights to cut off all state connec -
tions with the international network and to cut off all private communica -
tions deemed dangerous “to the security of the state or contrary to its laws, to 
public order or to decency” (Rutkowski 2011, 15). Today we popularly refer to 
“rights to cut off” as the Internet kill switch (Vargas- Leon 2016).
Importantly, Rutkowski (2011) included a detailed description of what it 
took for him to collect all the pertinent documents from multiple institu -
tional sources and to transfer the data from print and digital formats into a 
common digital format for analysis, processes that clearly took significant 
amounts of time and resources. By publicizing his data collection method 
and making the materials publicly available for use by others, Rutkowski 
urges us to do the same with other historical materials we need to study. In 
what other areas of Internet governance research would this kind of recu -
peration and sharing of primary research materials be of value? Should an 
institution take leadership in hosting such materials on behalf of the global 
community of Internet governance researchers?
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202538 S. Braman
International telecommunications network border issues have always 
been complex. Negotiations over international telecommunications net -
works in the late 19th and early 20th centuries revolved around such fun -
damental matters as the nature of corporations and what it means to be 
“foreign” (Zaj ácz 2019). For a long time, the US Federal Communications 
Commission operationally treated Canada and Mexico as domestic for regu -
latory purposes, and Alaska and Hawaii as foreign, because the agency found it 
more convenient to determine the boundaries by those of the specific net -
work technology involved (land technologies to get to Canada and Mexico, 
underwater technologies to get to Alaska and Hawaii) than by geopolitics. 
Decisions about where to put the “border” between countries linked by a 
telecommunications circuit, necessary for the purposes of determining who 
paid whom for what when it comes to network flows in the world of tele -
communications regulation as it had long been, were conceptual and nego -
tiated (Frieden 1993), lending particular importance to national categorical 
decisions made regarding how to regulate the “converged” technological 
environment once digitization was at hand (Frieden 1984, 2004) from the 
international network perspective.
What is required to carry through on commitments made in the interna -
tional treaties about electronic networks analyzed by Rutkowski (2011) is, of 
course, qualitatively and quantitatively more complex and thus difficult to 
understand and to successfully engage with in the contemporary environ -
ment. Tallinn Manual 2.0  (Schmitt 2017) essentially suggests a new policy 
principle— the right of a state not to know what is going through networks that 
cross its territory or for which it has any other kind of responsibility, as a pro -
tection against needing to act on it in ways that could be self-  destructive and/
or politically unacceptable (Braman 2017). There are other areas in which 
developments provide limits to states, most notably with cybersecurity—  
something cannot be considered an action of national or homeland security 
concern unless it is an action against the state or the state, or an agent of 
the state, is involved. Ongoing questions for Internet governance research -
ers include asking how we can tell if something or someone is “of the state” 
in any given context or process or agent, and whether that is so by fiat, 
de jure or de facto. The problems are conceptual, empirical, and— perhaps, 
apparently, and/or potentially— contextual. How do ICANN processes affect 
perceptions of effective boundaries and expectations that governance must 
come from geopolitically recognized states in accord with rule of law? What 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  39
are the effects of the DNS structure on regional, national, and local identi -
ties and community functions? What are the effective borders in cyberspace 
that ordinary users experience when engaging in activities of particular 
types, when they exhibit certain characteristics and/or when there are ten -
sions between activities as bounded by geopolitical, network, or institu -
tional (third- party intermediary) “jurisdictions”? How do users know when 
they are crossing each of these types of borders, and what matters to them 
when they do? To what extent are users aware when they cross borders on 
the Internet, and when does that matter to them?
Another path of Internet governance research involving borders became 
visible when the US government began surveilling information held on 
travelers’ electronic devices at border crossings (for a period, irrespective of 
citizenship status) and related developments. At the beginning of the 21st 
century, a draft “PATRIOT Act 2” named the Domestic Security Enhance -
ment Act was proposed that included reducing or eliminating some US 
citizenship rights for those who publicly expressed concern about the civil 
liberties and human rights dimensions of post- 9/11 security and surveil -
lance practices. It seems possible that a continuation of the Trump admin -
istration in the United States could result in dilution of citizenship rights 
on the basis of relationships with foreign nationals conducted through or 
facilitated by the Internet, providing a model that might well then be fol -
lowed by other countries. What kinds of political and legal proposals are 
being put forward regarding treatment of information and communication 
that crosses borders, the relationship networks of which they are a part, and 
the identities of those who engage in cross- border flows and relationships 
in countries around the world, whether those are directed at the border 
gateway protocol within the network, censorship of certain types of con -
tent, or other control points?
Alternative Governance Forms
It was during the second of the stages in the history of the literature on 
changing states that we saw the rise of governance forms that are alterna -
tive to the state and in competition with it (Bevir and Rhodes 2011). The 
Internet and its governance have provided the affordances through which 
to develop multinational and transnational organizational forms of even 
greater scale, scope, flexibility, and power relative to states. The network 
makes it possible for such organizations to engage in “regulatory arbitrage,” 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202540 S. Braman
maximizing organizational ability to take advantage of resources and oppor -
tunities offered by geopolitically recognized entities (Froomkin 1999). The 
work by Raymond and DeNardis (2015) on the varieties of multistakehold -
erism and Kulesza’s (2018) analysis of its limits are foundational on this 
subject for those studying Internet governance. Musiani (2016) points out 
that the DNS itself can simultaneously be considered a technology and an 
alternative governance institution.
It should not be surprising that as geopolitical governments privatize 
formerly public functions and corporations simultaneously become increas -
ingly governmental, the public and private sector entities as social technol -
ogies converge, yielding new organizational and decision- making forms. 
Two literatures studying these developments have been particularly influ -
ential. Scholars in the law and society tradition study the ways in which 
internal practices, programs, and rules serve governance functions (beyond 
the more traditionally acknowledged and publicly aggressive approaches 
of lobbying and revolving doors) (Mather 2013). In an example of such 
work relevant to Internet governance research as defined here, Bamberger 
and Mulligan (2015) studied corporate implementation of privacy law in 
several countries. The second literature of importance is that on govern -
mentality as theorized by Michel Foucault (1980, 1982, 1984). Cerny (2008) 
provides one example of this type of analysis as applied to the looseness, 
ambiguities, flexibility, uncertainties, and multiplicities of the Internet 
governance environment, but Foucauldian ideas have influenced many, 
including thinkers in mainstream political science (e.g., Jessop 2011). The 
two approaches— law and society, and governmentality— are not in conflict 
with each other, but whichever is used, these trends can make it more dif -
ficult for those studying Internet governance to pursue many types of ques -
tions because access to information becomes more difficult when it can 
be claimed that data and its processing are proprietary, when the data are 
lost altogether because what had been considered a government function is 
abandoned, or when the data are unavailable for other reasons. Jørgensen 
in chapter 13 provides important experience- based advice in this regard, 
but here the most pressing challenges that Internet governance researchers 
face are conceptual and methodological.
There are recurring aspirations to use the Internet to operate com -
pletely outside the reach of national and international law, whether that is 
attempted physically, as in the Sealand experiment, or through some other 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  41
means. The current locus of such aspirations is the blockchain, though 
as Werbach (2018) informatively and persuasively argues, the blockchain 
will be most useful and is most likely to succeed if it is fully articulated 
within the law. That point is not limited to the blockchain, though how 
such efforts relate to the law will vary. In her analysis of internal attempts 
by Silk Road to prevent illegal online activity in pursuit of the anonymous 
networking entity’s long- term success, Zaj ácz (2017) illustrates one reason 
this is so— the very protections for anonymity that allowed that network’s 
illegal activities to continue as long as they did out of view of the state in 
turn undermined efforts by those who managed Silk Road to guarantee that 
participants in the marketplace would meet their obligations in the manner 
required for the trust needed to sustain the market. Across types of cyber -
security incidents, Wolff (2018) has found that it is much harder for those 
who engage in cyberattacks to use what they get once they bring it out of a 
database or network than it is for them to get in.
A seriously understudied type of Internet governance is that taking place 
within the autonomous systems the Internet, “a system of interconnected 
autonomous systems” (Tozal 2016), comprises. They are important control 
points (DeNardis 2012, 2014), can be categorized by the types of peering 
relationships they preferentially engage in (Tozal 2016), and can be mapped 
geographically as well as topologically, providing insight into additional 
ways in which such systems may be subject to political control (Yacobi-  
Keller et al. 2018). Some argue that the multiplicity of these systems justify 
describing the Internet as distributed rather than decentralized (Mathew 
2016). When there are cyberattacks, they are leveled at autonomous sys -
tems, so Nur and Tozal (2018) suggest a method for measuring centrality 
that is based on how relatively critical a given autonomous system is to the 
network, or to society, as a whole. And that is about as far as the literature 
goes. Will we start thinking in terms of citizenship in autonomous systems, 
as the network unit of particular importance to user operations? Would 
going this route make it easier to think about governance tools that can be 
used in common irrespective of whether the autonomous system involved 
is public or private, or are different sets of governance tools still needed for 
the two types of subjects? With whom does thinking about autonomous 
systems from a governance perspective put ICANN in relation?
These trends come together with the increasing governmentalization 
of social media. Reversing the trend of what has been happening with 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202542 S. Braman
citizenship, which has been becoming thinner and thinner, platforms are 
building from thin to thick: first currency is offered, then a means of engag -
ing in transactions, then dispute resolution, and on. The announcement 
of Libra and its associated app that provides infrastructure for transactions 
and other financial matters from Facebook and collaborator corporations 
has gone the furthest in this regard by the time of writing. Geopolitical gov -
ernance entities are insisting that the offerings undergo government review 
and approval before proceeding. What are the further concerns, if any, from 
the Internet governance perspective? To what extent, and how, are Internet 
governance decisions responsible should such offerings draw significant 
resources away from the state and toward the corporation that hosts the 
social media platform that will serve as the governance infrastructure, in 
turn contributing to the weakening of rule of law from the perspective of 
geopolitically recognized states?
Conceptual and Methodological Limits
Although, as discussed above, the general socio- technical point has by now 
been beautifully made, illustrated, and practiced, today’s Internet gover -
nance research questions require attention to analytical dimensions not 
historically addressed. This in turn requires us to go further theoretically, 
conceptually, and methodologically in many areas for which this this chap -
ter does not have space, such as level and type of complexity and liabil -
ity issues. Following, though, are some of the conceptual, theoretical, and 
methodological challenges.
Stages of Information Processing
We are most accustomed to thinking about speech issues in terms of single 
speech acts that involve identifiable and quantifiable (unitizable) expres -
sions, flows of information, or sets of interactions. The sensemaking litera -
ture, and that which focuses on meaning making by an active audience, 
looks at how multiple flows come together at specific human conjunctures 
but still typically involve single steps. The problem of what it would take to 
effectively and meaningfully evaluate algorithmic decision- making, how -
ever, reminds us that in most, if not almost all, cases, it will actually be 
a stream of steps of information processing that yields the effect of any 
given one. How many steps back need to be known to be confident of the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  43
provenance of informational or communicative content or of an action, 
whether by a human or daemon agent? Each information processing step 
can involve interactions with others that may themselves be complex 
systems involving diverse types of liability and levels of responsibility. 
Under what conditions is a specific agent to be held accountable for an act or 
communication resulting from interactions among many agents? We are 
beginning to hear calls for provenance of data regarding its information 
processing history from those seeking accountability and transparency of 
algorithms. How is such provenance most accurately and usefully deter -
mined? Who is to hold the records?
Conceptual and historical kernels of what it would take to achieve oper -
ationalizable answers to these questions for the purposes of current use 
within geopolitical legal systems and within the network exist. Treatment 
of the right to receive information as a necessary element of the right to 
communicate in the United States (and thus something that is also pro -
tected by the First Amendment) is one important example of an inherently 
multistep approach to thinking about the stages of information process -
ing that need protection in order to achieve the constitutional goal. What 
new rights might be recognized as a result of further developing our abil -
ity to analyze algorithms for governance purposes? How might we come 
to articulate existing rights in new ways in order to map validly onto the 
digital environment in comprehensible ways? In what forms might such 
developments appear across the diverse institutions involved in Internet 
governance? What methods might be developed to identify when rights are 
being supported or being curtailed?
Analysis of information policy in US Supreme Court decisions of the 
1980s (Braman 1988) found that essentially all involved some sort of refer -
ence to a model of an information production chain on which distinctions 
deemed to be of constitutional importance relied, whether implicitly or 
explicitly. A highly systematic effort to conceptualize information policy 
provisions across stages of the information production chain is underway 
by Rebecca MacKinnon’s Ranking Digital Rights nonprofit organization 
(https:// rankingdigitalrights . org ). How can these and other extant models 
available for distinguishing among stages of information production chains 
be used in Internet governance research? Do we need to conceptualize 
additional stages of such chains, or conceptualize known stages differently, 
in order to adequately understand what is happening online for Internet 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202544 S. Braman
governance purposes? What methodological tools can we develop to dis -
tinguish among stages?
Types of Information Processing
Reliance on information production chain models in the course of legal 
analysis means that distinctions among types of information processing are 
being made for governance purposes. When struggles over specific types of 
information processing ensue, often what is at stake is whether the kind of 
processing involved is speech or not, with the answer determining whether 
fundamental protections for human rights and civil liberties, such as those 
protecting free speech, apply. Legal debates over this as they specifically 
arise in the digital environment go back at least to the 1990s (Burk 2000). 
Battles over treating code as speech should be expected to continue (Cole -
man 2009; Petersen 2015). In the world of what is now called cyber opera -
tions, the question of how to distinguish cybercrime (matters of national 
law) from cyberwar (matters of international law) has proven so difficult 
that this new terminology was developed to refer to the two jointly for 
analytical purposes (Schmitt 2017).
Just how to draw distinctions among types of information processing 
in the online environment is at the heart of debates over governance of 
and by algorithms. Most of the literature in this terrain to date has started 
by identifying undesirable effects of the use of particular algorithms, such 
as bias or incitement. The work on information policy in constitutional 
law mentioned above distinguished between only two types of information 
processing— human and machinic, what we now refer to as algorithmic. 
Already in the 1980s it was clear both that that was far from adequate, and 
that going further would require significant intellectual effort. Now that 
the algorithmic moment is before us, it is time to invest in that effort. For 
each issue examined by an Internet governance researcher, what are the 
types of information processing involved, and what are the distinct gover -
nance problems attached to each? Is there a distinction between general-  
purpose and single- purpose information production chains that is useful 
for governance purposes? How do the policy tools used to address the same 
issue as it may arise across different stages of the information production 
chain vary? Under conditions in which it can be assumed that techno -
logical innovation will continue at a significant pace and highly competi -
tively, is it possible to group types of processes together for evaluative and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  45
governance purposes with confidence that the range of types of informa -
tion processing of concern, and their uses, are actually being taken into 
account? What methods can be developed to evaluate the efficacy of such 
policy tools?
Types of Speakers and Information Processors
Legal systems typically distinguish among types of communication speak -
ers and receivers; examples include children versus adults, willing versus 
unwilling receiver, employee versus nonemployee, and spouse versus non -
spouse. Analytical dimensions of long- standing interest include whether, 
and, if so, how, a speaker is anonymous; independent or autonomous (two 
related but distinct features); intelligent; and someone with whom there 
is a confidential relationship. In the digital environment, we have come 
additionally to think about whether the speaker is human or machinic, and 
we have come to think of speech as a distinct set of types of information 
processing. For those studying Internet governance in light of its impor -
tance vis- à- vis governance in general, it is particularly useful to approach 
the human versus machinic aspect through the lens of the question of who 
or what qualifies as a legal subject, and as a citizen.
Recognition of the distinction between human and machinic users— the 
latter referred to as daemons— was evident very early on in the history of 
Internet design (Braman 2011; McKelvey 2018). Each type of user required 
different things from the designers, some of whom communicated that they 
found the needs of daemons easier to understand than those of humans. 
It was acknowledged, however, that serving the needs of humans, odd as 
they might seem, led to solutions that were in many cases also significant 
improvements for the network. Artificial intelligence research focuses on 
how technologies can do things that humans do better than humans can 
do them. We are just beginning to see research on the separate question of 
how humans and daemons may differ when they engage in the same types 
of information processing. The story that deterrence games about nuclear 
war used computers rather than humans because it was found that humans 
would never launch nuclear warheads but computers would may be apocry -
phal, but it is telling even so. Vempaty et al. (2018) have found that humans 
and computers do differ when they engage in decision- making on at least 
some kinds of problems. This line of research is extremely important for 
those analyzing Internet governance processes. What kinds of differences 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202546 S. Braman
in how the two types of information processors work need to be taken 
into account? How do these differences affect the values that are embedded 
in technology design or network architecture? How could such differences 
be presented in public and policy- making conversations in such a man -
ner that they would make sense and could reasonably be the subject of 
decision- making?
The question of whether or not an entity is a legal subject arises both for 
individuals and for groups of people. Regarding the former, there is now a 
field of “robot law” (see, e.g., Calo, Froomkin, and Kerr 2016) that begins 
with the issue of personhood. When it comes to the latter, autonomous 
networks like WikiLeaks— not to be mistaken with the autonomous systems 
discussed above— are already proving problematic, as the US government 
found when it attempted to pursue that entity in the course of the Bradley 
(now Chelsea) Manning trial (Braman 2014). As social technologies con -
tinue to converge, producing new social forms, this problem is likely to arise 
repeatedly. The question of whether nonhumans can become legal subjects 
first came to the fore in the 1970s in the United States, when the issue 
was the environment. The history begins with a student, an origin story 
of a type familiar to Internet governance researchers: a law school student, 
Christopher Stone— son of the highly independent and influential investi -
gative journalist I. F. Stone— sent his argument, since published as the book 
Should Trees Have Standing?  (Stone 1974), to US Supreme Court Justice Wil -
liam O. Douglas, who in turn convinced the court to recognize that forests 
have standing before the law and thus have rights that could be legally 
protected. The suggestion that entities with artificial intelligence should be 
granted personhood was put forward before the Internet was commercial -
ized and made available for general use (Solum 1991). Resonances between 
discussions of legal personhood for biological and machinic nonhuman 
entities continue (see, e.g., Solaiman 2017; Teubner 2006). What would 
change in Internet governance should daemons (which can include things 
like operating systems and network layers) and algorithms be granted legal 
personhood? How should the governance implications of such a funda -
mentally important development be taken into account when considering 
the question? Should all daemons and algorithms be treated alike from this 
perspective and, if not, what methods can be developed for drawing lines?
The literatures on citizenship dimensions of the Internet are large 
and diverse, as most broadly conceptualized beginning with political 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  47
communication research on the impact of the Internet on political behav -
iors. John Perry Barlow (1996) famously issued a “Declaration of Inde -
pendence” for those who see themselves first and foremost as citizens of 
cyberspace, and shortly afterward it became popular to think in terms of 
the network citizen (Hauben and Hauben 1997). A reading of the Internet 
RFCs from the perspective of what they say about legal, policy, and political 
matters over time shows the development of a sense of network citizenship 
that can conflict with geopolitical citizenship, creating problems for Inter -
net governance (Braman 2013). This author’s first exposure to the concept 
in the mass media was in a Singaporean newspaper in 2000, which used 
“network citizenship” as a term the readers were assumed to understand 
to refer to individuals who engaged in political activity online. Indeed, a 
quick search in summer of 2019 of the literature for “network citizenship” 
finds most of it is research on Asian countries. The development of China’s 
social credit system (Liang et al. 2018) provides evidence of one direction 
in which network citizenship can evolve. MacKinnon (2012) argues for 
another, reviving the use of the concept in her call for development of a 
sense of global participation in decision- making for the Internet, done in a 
manner that effectively— not just rhetorically— protects human rights and 
civil liberties. How can tensions between geopolitical and network political 
citizenship be resolved? The history of the concept of citizenship is marked 
by the addition of dimensions considered to be inherent to the notion; do 
we need additional conceptual work to take into account the nature and 
implications of network citizenship? How does approaching Internet gover -
nance research through the lens of network citizenship affect the questions 
we ask and how we ask them? What does inclusion of both machinic and 
network citizenship require of the indicators we use to evaluate the nature 
and strength of democratic practices?
Governability and Irony
No one disputes that such matters as equity and fairness should be taken 
into account in technology design and network architecture. The challenge 
is that doing so may require more than we are now actually capable of 
in terms of fully understanding what is happening when highly complex 
systems multiply interact with each other across scales, geographies, uses, 
scopes, and contextual conditions. This is no apologia, nor a suggestion 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202548 S. Braman
that demands for incorporating attention to such matters within design 
processes in as accountable a manner as possible shouldn’t continue to be 
fought for— but it is an expression of humility in the face of what might 
actually be humanly possible when it comes to the governability of this 
environment, irrespective of by whom or for what purposes.
In the face of what so many political scientists now acknowledge to be 
the inevitability of governance failures, Jessop (2011) identifies three ways 
in which governance entities manage to not fail, to appear not to fail, or 
to, in essence, redefine what is meant by failure. An entity can achieve 
the appearance of successful governance by making sure that any problems 
appear beyond the spatiotemporal horizons (or perceptions of horizons) 
of a given set of players or forces. It can survive through a continual fuite 
en avant , continually escaping from one crisis by turning to another mode 
of policy making that will also fail. Or policy makers could engage in self-  
reflexive irony, even when they know they are likely to fail.
For Internet governance researchers, the first two of these are not within 
reach, but the third is. There are many ways of thinking about the job of an 
intellectual, but Clifford Geertz reminds us that, among other things, it is a 
way of life, and so are the methods we use:
The various disciplines … are more than just intellectual coigns of vantage but are 
ways of being in the world, to invoke a Heideggerian formula, forms of life, to use a 
Wittgensteinian, or varieties of noetic experience, to adapt a Jamesian. In the same 
way that Papuans or Amazonians inhabit the world they imagine, so do high energy 
physicists or historians of the Mediterranean in the age of Phillip II. … To set out to 
deconstruct Yeats’s imagery, absorb oneself in black holes, or measure the effect of 
schooling on economic achievement is not just to take up a technical task but to 
take on a cultural frame that defines a great part of one’s life. (Geertz 1982, 24)
The researcher is the methodological instrument irrespective of any other 
tools used (Lindlof and Taylor 2018). When we are talking about method, 
we are talking about who we are.
The irony of Internet governance research is that, as most broadly 
defined, Internet governance itself may not exist in any of a number of 
senses. Policies we do put in place may not be effective. What makes sense 
technically may not work politically, socially, or legally, and vice versa. It 
is becoming difficult to separate the Internet as the subject of governance 
of human communications from a wide variety of other types of processes 
and from the material environment itself. The subject (and subjects) may 
be too complex to be governable at all, or it may not even exist as a legal 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  49
subject. Political processes we thought were stable enough to support con -
tinued incremental social, economic, political, and cultural change are 
turning out not to be. Put together, all of these make Internet governance 
research a problem in metagovernance.
Whether or not Internet governance exists, we have a right to it— or may 
choose to go on as if we believe we do. Researchers are involved with lots of 
“ologies,” from epistemology and methodology on. Deontology is among 
them.
Note
1. Sandra Braman, from The One Verse City  (Eugene, OR: Wolf Run Books, 1974).
References
Abbate, J. (2017). What and where is the Internet? (Re)defining Internet histories. 
Internet Histories, 1 (1– 2), 8– 14.
Antonelli, C. (1988). The emergence of the networked firm. In Cristiano Antonelli 
(Ed.), New information technology and industrial change: The Italian case  (pp. 13– 32). 
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Antonelli, C. (2017). Digital knowledge generation and the appropriability trade- off. 
Telecommunications Policy, 41 , 991– 1002.
Archer, M. S. (1982). Morphogenesis versus structuration: On combining structure 
and action. The British Journal of Sociology, 33 (4), 455– 483.
Archer, M. S. (1988). Towards theoretical unification: Structure, culture and mor -
phogenesis. Culture and agency: The place of culture in social theory  (pp. 247– 307). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bache, I., Bartle, I., Flinders, M., & Marsden, G. (2015). Multilevel governance and cli -
mate change: Insights from transport policy . Pickering & Chatto.
Bambauer, J. R. (2017). Dr. Robot. UC Davis Law Review, 51 , 383– 398.
Bamberger, K. A., & Mulligan, D. K. (2015). Privacy on the ground: Driving corporate 
behavior in the United States and Europe . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barlow, J. P. (1996). A declaration of the independence of cyberspace. Duke Law & 
Technology Review, 18 (1), 5– 7.
Beckett, S. (1953/2012). The unnameable . New York, NY: Grove Press.
Bevir, M. (2011). Governance as theory, practice, and dilemma. In M. Bevir (Ed.), 
The Sage handbook of governance  (pp. 1– 16). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202550 S. Braman
Bevir, M., & Rhodes, R. A. W. (2011). The stateless state. In M. Bevir (Ed.), The Sage 
handbook of governance  (pp. 203– 217). London, UK: Sage Publications.
Bevir, M., & Rhodes, R. A. W. (2016). The “3Rs” in rethinking governance: Ruling, 
rationalities, and resistance. In M. Bevir & R. A. W Rhodes (Eds.),  Rethinking gover -
nance: Ruling, rationalities and resistance  (pp. 1– 21). New York, NY: Routledge.
Bovaird, T. (2005). Public governance: Balancing stakeholder power in a network 
society. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 71 (2), 217– 228.
Bowker, G. (1994). Science on the run: Information management and industrial geophys -
ics at Schlumberger, 1920– 1940 . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bradshaw, S., & DeNardis, L. (2018). The politicization of the Internet’s domain 
name system: Implications for Internet security, universality, and freedom. New 
Media & Society, 20 (1), 332– 350.
Braman, S. (1974). The one verse city . Eugene, OR: Wolf Run Books.
Braman, S. (1988). Information policy and the United States Supreme Court  (Unpub -
lished dissertation). University of Minnesota. Dissertation #8823521; Proquest docu -
ment ID 303670545.
Braman, S. (1995). Policy for the net and the Internet. Annual Review of Information 
Science and Technology (ARIST), 30 , 5– 75.
Braman, S. (2002). Informational meta- technologies and international relations: The 
case of biotechnologies. In J. Rosenau & J. P. Singh (Eds.), Information technologies 
and global politics: The changing scope of power and governance  (pp. 91– 112). Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Braman, S. (2004a). The processes of emergence. In The emergent global information 
policy regime  (pp. 1– 11). Houndsmills, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Braman, S. (2004b). The emergent global information policy regime. In The 
emergent global information policy regime  (pp. 12– 37). Houndsmills, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Braman, S. (2004c). Where has media policy gone? Defining the field in the twenty-  
first century. Communication Law and Policy, 9 (2), 153– 158.
Braman, S. (2005). The micro-  and macroeconomics of information. Annual Review 
of Information Science and Technology (ARIST), 40 , 3– 52.
Braman, S. (2006). Change of state: Information, policy, and power . Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Braman, S. (2011). The framing years: Policy fundamentals in the Internet design 
process, 1969– 1979. The Information Society, 27 (5), 295– 310.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  51
Braman, S. (2013). The geopolitical vs. the network political: Internet designers and 
governance. International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 9 (3), 277– 296.
Braman, S. (2014). “We are Bradley Manning”: Information policy, the legal subject, 
and the WikiLeaks complex. International Journal of Communication, 8 , 2603– 2618.
Braman, S. (2015). The state of cloud computing policy. In C. Yoo & J.- F. Blanchette 
(Eds.), Regulating the cloud: Policy for computing infrastructure  (pp. 279– 288). Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Braman, S. (2017). The medium as power: Information and its flows as acts of war. 
In C. George (Ed.), Communicating with power  (pp. 3– 22). Bern, Switzerland: Peter 
Lang, International Communication Association Theme Book Series.
Browne, M. (1997). The field of information policy, I: Fundamental concepts. Journal 
of Information Science, 23 (4), 261– 275.
Bruce, R. R., Cunard, J. P., & Director, M. D. (1986). From telecommunications to elec -
tronic services: A global spectrum of definitions, boundary lines, and structures . Boston, 
MA: Butterworth.
Brügger, N., Goggin, G., Milligan, I., & Schafer, V. (2017). Introduction: Internet 
histories. Internet Histories, 11 (1– 2), 1– 7.
Burk, D. (1997). Jurisdiction in a world without borders. Virginia Journal of Law and 
Technology, 1 (3), 1522– 1687.
Burk, D. (2000). Patenting speech. Texas Law Review, 79 , 99– 162.
Calo, R., Froomkin, A. M., & Kerr, I. (Eds.). (2016). Robot law . Edward Elgar.
Cerny, P. G. (2008). The governmentalization of world politics. In E. Kofman & 
G. Youngs (Eds.), Globalization: Theory and practice  (3rd ed., pp. 221– 237). London, 
UK: Continuum.
Clark, D. D. (2018). Designing an Internet . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, J. (2012). Configuring the networked self: Law, code, and the play of everyday 
practice . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Coleman, G. (2009). Code is speech: Legal tinkering, expertise, and protest among 
free and open source software developers. Cultural Anthropology, 24 (3), 420– 454.
Coletta, C., & Kitchin, R. (2017, July– December). Algorhythmic governance: Regu -
lating the “heartbeat” of a city using the Internet of Things. Big Data & Society,  1– 17.
Cowhey, P. F. (1990). The international telecommunications regime: The political 
roots of regimes for high technology. International Organization, 44 (2), 169– 199.
Crawford, S. P. (2007). The Internet and the project of communication law. UCLA 
Law Review, 55 , 359– 407.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202552 S. Braman
DeLanda, M. (1991). War in the age of intelligent machines . New York, NY: Zone 
Books.
DeNardis, L. (2012). Hidden levers of Internet control. Information, Communication & 
Society, 15 (5), 720– 738.
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war on Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Musiani, F. (2016). Governance by infrastructure. In F. Musiani, D. 
L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The turn to infrastructure in Internet 
governance  (pp. 1– 23). Houndsmills, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dezalay, Y., & Garth, B. G. (1996). Dealing in virtue: International commercial arbi -
tration and the construction of a transnational legal order . Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Drezner, D. W. (2009). The power and peril of international regime complexity. Per-
spectives on Politics, 7 (1), 65– 70.
Edwards, L., & Veale, M. (2017). Slave to the algorithm? Why a “right to an explana -
tion” is probably not the remedy you are looking for. Duke Law & Technology Review, 
16(1), 18– 84.
Epstein, D., Katzenbach, C., & Musiani, F. (2016). Doing Internet governance: 
Practices, controversies, infrastructures, and institutions. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). 
doi:10.14763/2016.3.435
Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge  (C. Gordon, Ed.). New York: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical Inquiry, 8 (4), 777–795.
Foucault, M. (1984). Space, knowledge and power. In P. Rabinow (Ed.), The Foucault 
reader  (pp. 239– 256). New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Frieden, R. M. (1984). The international application of the Second Computer 
Inquiry. Michigan Yearbook of International Legal Studies, 5 , 189– 218.
Frieden, R. (1993). International toll revenue division: Tackling the inequalities and 
inefficiencies. Telecommunications Policy, 17 (3), 221– 233.
Frieden, R. M. (2004). The FCC’s name game: How shifting regulatory classifications 
affect competition. Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 19 (4), 1275– 1314.
Froomkin, M. A. (1997). The Internet as a source of regulatory arbitrage. In B. 
Kahin & C. Nesson (Eds.), Borders in cyberspace  (pp. 129– 163). Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Froomkin, M. A. (1999). Of governments and governance. Berkeley Technology Law 
Journal, 14 , 617– 633.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  53
Geertz, C. (1982). The way we think now: Toward an ethnography of modern 
thought. Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 35 (5), 24.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration . 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gurumurthy, A., & Chami, N. (2016). Internet governance as “ideology in practice”—  
India’s “Free Basics” controversy. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). doi:10.14763.2016.3.431
Hauben, M., & Hauben, R. (1997). Netizens: On the history and impact of Usenet and 
the Internet . Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Held, D. (1989). Political theory and the modern state . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Holbrook, J., & Reynolds, J. (Eds.). (1991). Site security handbook . RFC 1244. Retrieved 
from the Internet Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1244
Horwitz, R. B. (1989). The irony of regulatory reform: The deregulation of American tele -
communications . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Jessop, B. (2004). Multi- level governance and multi- level metagovernance. In I. 
Bache & M. Finders (Eds.), Multi- level governance  (pp. 49– 74). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Jessop, B. (2011). Metagovernance. In M. Bevir (Ed.), The Sage handbook of governance  
(pp. 106– 123). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Jessop, B. (2016). The state: Past, present, and future . Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Johnson, D., & Post, D. (1996). Law and borders: The rise of law in cyberspace. Stan-
ford Law Review, 48 (5), 1367– 1402.
Kaye, D. (2019). Speech police: The global struggle to govern the Internet . New York, NY: 
Columbia Global Reports.
Kent, S., & Linn, J. (1989). Privacy enhancement for Internet electronic mail: Part  II— 
Certificate- based key management . RFC 1114. Retrieved from the Internet Engineering 
Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1114
Krasner, S. D. (Ed.). (1983). International regimes . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kulesza, J. (2018). Balancing privacy and security in a multistakeholder environ -
ment: ICANN, WHOIS, and GDPR. The Visio Journal, 3 , 48– 58.
Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor- network: Ordering, strategy, and 
heterogeneity. Systems Practice, 5 (4), 379– 393.
Liang, F., Das, V., Kostyuk, N., & Hussain, M. M. (2018). Constructing a data- driven 
society: China’s social credit system as a state surveillance infrastructure. Policy & 
Internet, 10 (4), 415– 453.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202554 S. Braman
Libra Association Members. (n.d.). An introduction to Libra . Libra White Paper. 
Retrieved from https:// libra . org / en - US / white -paper/
Lindlof, T. R., & Taylor, B. (2018). Qualitative communication research methods  (4th 
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
MacKinnon, R. (2012). Consent of the networked: The worldwide struggle for Internet 
freedom . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Martine, B. J. (1992). Indeterminacy and intelligibility . Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Massumi, B. (2007). Potential politics and the primacy of preemption. Theory & 
Event, 10 (2). doi:10.1353/tae.2007.0066
Mather, L. (2013). Law and society. In R. E. Goodin (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of 
political science . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/97801  
99604456.013.0015
Mathew, A. J. (2016). The myth of the decentralised Internet. Internet Policy Review, 
5(3). doi:10.14763/2016.3.425
McKelvey, F. (2018). Internet daemons: Digital communications possessed . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
McLuhan, E., & McLuhan, M. (1992). Laws of media: The new science . Toronto, 
Canada: University of Toronto Press.
Merrill, K. (2016). Domains of control: Governance of and by the domain name 
system. In F. Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The 
turn to infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 89– 106). New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Meuleman, L. (2008). Public management and the metagovernance of hierarchies, net -
works, and markets: The feasibility of designing and managing governance style combina -
tions. The Hague, Netherlands: Physica- Verlag.
Milan, S., & ten Oever, N. (2017). Coding and encoding rights in Internet infrastruc -
ture. Internet Policy Review, 6 (1). doi:1.14763/2017.1442
The Moscow Times. (2019, February 12). Russia moves to grant government the 
power to shut down the Internet, explained. The Moscow Times . Retrieved from 
https:// www . themoscowtimes . com / 2019 / 02 / 12 / russia - moves - grant - government  
- power - shut - down - internet - explained - a64470
Mueller, M. (2004). ICANN and INTELSAT: Global communication technologies and 
their incorporation into international regimes. In Sandra Braman (Ed.), The emergent 
global information policy regime  (pp. 62– 85). Houndsmills, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  55
Musiani, F. (2015). Practice, plurality, performativity, and plumbing: Internet gover -
nance research meets science and technology studies. Science, Technology, & Human 
Values, 40 (2), 272– 286.
Musiani, F. (2016). Alternative technologies as alternative institutions: The case of 
the domain name system. In F. Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levin -
son (Eds.), The turn to infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 73– 87). New York, NY: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
NORSAR. (n.d.). NORSAR and the Internet. Retrieved May 22, 2010, from http://  
www . norsar . no / pc - 5 - 30 - NORSAR - and - the - Internet . aspx
North American Directory Forum, The. (1991). A naming scheme for c =US. RFC 1218. 
Retrieved from the Internet Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org  
/ html / rfc1218
Nur, A. Y., & Tozal, M. E. (2018). Identifying critical autonomous systems in the 
Internet. The Journal of Supercomputing, 74 (10), 4965– 4985.
Nye, J. S. (2014). The regime complex for managing global cyber activities . Global Com -
mission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 1). Centre for International 
Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline  
. org / sites / default / files / gcig_paper_no1 . pdf
OECD. (2018). OECD science, technology and innovation outlook 2018: Adapting to tech -
nological and societal disruption . Paris, France: Author.
Owen, K. (1982). Data communications: IFIP’s international “network” of experts . RFC 
828. Retrieved from the Internet Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf  
. org / html / rfc828
Petersen, J. (2015). Is code speech? Law and the expressivity of machinic language. 
New Media & Society, 17 (3), 415– 431.
Pool, I. de Sola. (1983). Technologies of freedom . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Rajnish, P., Ranjan, B. S., Mridula, P., Shrutilka, B., Neha, A., & Divya, S. (2017). Role 
of Internet governance in achievement of Sustainable Development Goals. Interna -
tional Journal of Research in Social Sciences, 7 (9), 574– 577.
Raymond, M., & DeNardis, L. (2015). Multistakeholderism: Anatomy of an inchoate 
global institution. International Theory, 7 (3), 571– 616.
Reidenberg, J. (2005). Technology and Internet jurisdiction. University of Pennsylva -
nia Law Review, 153 , 1951– 1974.
Reynolds, J. (1989). The helminthiasis of the Internet . RFC 1135. Retrieved from the 
Internet Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1135
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202556 S. Braman
Russell, A. L. (2017). Hagiography, revisionism & blasphemy in Internet histories. 
Internet Histories, 1 (1– 2), 15– 25.
Rutkowski, A. (2011). Public international law of the international telecommunica -
tion instruments: Cyber security treaty provisions since 1850. Info, 13 (1), 13– 31.
Schmitt, M. N. (Ed.). (2013). Tallinn manual . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
Schmitt, M. N. (Ed.). (2017). Tallinn manual 2.0 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer -
sity Press.
Solaiman, S. M. (2017). Legal personality of robots, corporations, idols and chim -
panzees: A quest for legitimacy. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 25 (2), 155– 179.
Solum, L. B. (1991). Legal personhood for artificial intelligences. North Carolina Law 
Review, 70 , 1231.
Star, S. L., & Ruhleder, K. (1996). Steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: Design 
and access for large information spaces. Information Systems Research, 7 (1), 111– 134.
Stone, C. D. (1974). Should trees have standing?  Palo Alto, CA: William Kaufmann.
Suskind, R. (2004, October 17). Faith, certainty and the presidency of George W. 
Bush. The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved from www . nytimes . com / 2004 / 10 / 17  
/ magazine / 17BUSH . html
Tass. (2019, May 1). Putin signs law on reliable Russian Internet. Tass. Retrieved 
from http:// tass . com / politics / 1056750
ten Oever, N. (2019). Productive contestation, civil society, and global governance: 
Human rights as a boundary object in ICANN. Policy & Internet, 11 (1), 37– 60.
Teubner, G. (2006). Rights of non- humans? Electronic agents and animals as new 
actors in politics and law. Journal of Law and Society, 33 (4), 497– 521.
Theall, D. F. (1999). James Joyce’s techno- poetics . Toronto, Ontario: University of 
Toronto Press.
Tozal, M. E. (2016). The Internet: A system of interconnected autonomous systems. 
In 2016 Annual IEEE Systems Conference (SysCon)  (pp. 1– 8). IEEE.
Tribe, L. H. (1985). Constitutional calculus: Equal justice or economic efficiency? 
Harvard Law Review, 98 (3), 592– 621.
Vargas- Leon, P. (2016). Tracking Internet shutdown practices: Democracies and 
hybrid regimes. In F. Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), 
The turn to infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 167– 188). Houndsmills, UK: Pal -
grave Macmillan.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Irony of Internet Governance Research  57
Vempaty, A., Varshney, L. R., Koop, G. J., Criss, A. H., & Varshney, P. K. (2018). 
Experiments and models for decision fusion by humans in inference networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Signal Processing, 66 (11), 2960– 2971.
Werbach, K. (2018). The blockchain and the new architecture of trust . Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Wolff, J. (2018). You’ll see this message when it is too late: The legal and economic after -
math of cybersecurity breaches . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Yacobi- Keller, U., Savin, E., Fabian, B., & Ermakova, T. (2018). Towards geographical 
analysis of the autonomous system network. International Journal of Networking and 
Virtual Organizations, 21 (3), 379– 397.
Zajácz, R. (2017). Silk Road: The market beyond the reach of the state, The Informa -
tion Society, 33 (1), 1– 12.
Zajácz, R. (2019). Reluctant power: Networks, corporations, and the struggle for global 
governance in the early 20th century . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zittrain, J. L. (2005). Jurisdiction . St. Paul, MN: Foundation Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025This chapter tracks the emergence of “Internet governance” as a label, a 
field of research and academic study, and a real- world arena where stake -
holders and interest groups clash and cooperate. We try to look at all three 
of them simultaneously— label, field of study, and set of practices and 
institutions— focusing on the interplay among them over time. We have 
chosen to begin our assessment of the field of Internet governance on the 
basis of when the term started to be consciously recognized as a phenom -
enon and labeled as such.
Some may argue that some form of Internet governance was occur -
ring before this; they might, for example, begin with the US Department of 
Defense’s ARPANET and would characterize hammering out some of the early 
design principles of internetworking as Internet governance. An even broader 
approach, developed by Sandra Braman in chapter 2, tries to situate Internet 
governance in the convergence of computing and communication technolo -
gies in the 1950s and 1960s and the globalization of communication net -
works in the 1970s and 1980s. And while it is true that the Internet entered 
a policy context shaped by these processes, it is also true that the policy and 
governance of integrated services digital network (ISDN), or cross- border data 
flows over private leased telecommunication circuits, cannot be characterized 
as Internet governance. The Internet had its own distinctive protocols that 
posed unique governance problems. The Internet also evolved its own stan -
dards development organizations and governance institutions, such as the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and address registries, that were outside 
the established institutions of global telecommunications governance.
Historical periodizations are neither correct nor incorrect; they are more 
or less suited to specific purposes. Our purpose is not to track communica -
tions policy in general but to reveal the trajectory of Internet governance as 3 Inventing Internet Governance: The Historical Trajectory 
of the Phenomenon and the Field
Milton L. Mueller and Farzaneh Badiei
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202560 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
a distinct arena of public policy and global governance. By doing that, we 
hope to assess the usefulness and longevity of the term “Internet gover -
nance” as the label for this field. It makes sense, therefore, to start with the 
time period after the Internet protocols had been developed and imple -
mented and their use by the public had reached the point at which it posed 
problems that had to be resolved in public arenas through legal, political, 
and institutional means. This did not happen until the Internet was open 
to widespread public use and was recognized as something that could be or 
should be subject to public governance.
Our chapter contributes to the overarching theme of this book by ana -
lyzing the evolution of the field of Internet governance studies. We show 
how Internet governance research and scholarly participation appeared at 
stages of the Internet’s development, the emergence of distinct Internet 
governance problems, and how and why they became important research 
topics. This can help scholars identify emerging topics that relate to Internet 
governance. We have also identified how various disciplines got involved 
with Internet governance research. For example, early on, the Internet gov -
ernance field was mostly rooted in legal studies, but as the Internet became 
more widespread, its governance started to intersect with other fields such 
as political science and international relations. We briefly mention the 
emergence of theories of Internet governance, new research methods, and 
the use of new research tools to analyze Internet- generated data.
Phase One (1993– 1997): Discovery and Exceptionalism
The term “Internet governance,” as far as we can tell, does not appear in any 
scholarly or news articles before 1995 (Kowack 1995). But the words “gover -
nance” and “law,” on the one hand, and “cyberspace,” “Internet,” and “the 
Net,” on the other, started to be used in close association with each other 
several years before that, roughly from 1993 on (see, for example, Braman 
1995). That period corresponds to the emergence of the Internet as a mass 
public medium. That emergence was contingent on three events: the devel -
opment and adoption of the World Wide Web protocol from 1989– 1993, the 
publication of freely downloadable web browser software after 1991, and the 
privatization of the Internet backbone and its opening to commercial use by 
the US National Science Foundation in 1995. Together, these developments 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  61
made the Internet accessible to ordinary businesses and end users. (For an 
early newspaper account of this transition, see Lewis [1994].)
The most notable and interesting feature of the earliest Internet gover -
nance discourse is its vigorous debate on conceiving of cyberspace as its 
own place, or what some have called Internet exceptionalism. John Perry 
Barlow (1996) is usually put forward as the paragon of exceptionalism, but 
typically this is done to discredit the idea on the cheap. Barlow is a conve -
nient strawman for antiexceptionalists because he was a rock lyricist, not a 
social science scholar, and his Declaration  was a manifesto and rallying cry, 
not a carefully developed, theoretically grounded argument.
But contemporary to Barlow, legal scholars were having a far more seri -
ous debate about the extent to which cyberspace was a terrain that should 
develop its own rules and institutions. David Johnson and David Post were 
also exceptionalists (Johnson and Post 1996), and they were among the first 
to ask explicitly, “How shall the net be governed?” (Johnson and Post 1997). 
Focusing on the Internet’s operational reliance on voluntary transborder 
cooperation, they developed an argument for decentralized, emergent law 
as an alternative to traditional hierarchical, state- centric control. The word 
“governance,” which was also gaining credence in UN documents at the 
same time (UNDP 1997), was a softer term than “government” and implied 
a more polycentric order.
Johnson and Post’s argument is often unfairly equated with a cruder, 
technological determinist argument that the Internet is inherently resis -
tant to state control. But the emergent law argument was normative, not 
positive: it asserted that the Internet could and probably should  follow a 
new model of nonnational governance, not that it necessarily would  be 
governed in that way.
Even before Johnson and Post, in what is perhaps the earliest law review 
article on cyberspace governance, Hardy (1994) also opted for the excep -
tionalist camp. Like others in this period, he does not use the term “Inter -
net governance” but refers to cyberspace law, or the customs and rules 
associated with its governance. His paper asks whether we should treat 
(the whole of) cyberspace as a separate jurisdiction. While inspired by law 
and economics scholars and judges, Hardy also refers to multistakeholder 
collaboration and bottom- up rulemaking. He rejects established intergov -
ernmental organizations as unsuitable for resolving transjurisdictional 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202562 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
disputes on the Internet and instead puts forward the idea of having a world 
cyber court. He calls for “international cooperation among a wide array of 
groups” for the court, which seems to imply a multistakeholder governance 
system. Similarly, Tim Wu addressed the issue of cyberspace sovereignty—  
not the sovereignty of states, but of cyberspace itself— in 1997 (Wu 1997). 
Wu’s treatment contained a remarkably prescient discussion of the applica -
tion of international relations theory to cyberspace governance. As with 
Hardy, cyberspace governance, not Internet governance, is the dominant 
label. It was, as the next section explains, the formation of the Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) that cemented the 
term “Internet governance” into place.
Aside from the broad discourse about the new world created by cyber -
space, legal scholars were attuned to the less sweeping but still novel and 
intellectually exciting problems raised by the commercialization of the 
Internet. Novel legal issues were posed by the nascent online economy:
• Trademark law and domain names (Burk 1995)
• Intermediary responsibility and copyright protection (Boyle 1996; Hardy 
1994; Samuelson 1996)
• Censorship and filtering of Internet content (Resnick 1997; Resnick and 
Miller 1996)
• Private contract law versus public law and jurisdictional conflict (Perritt 
1996)
As the fascination with cyberlaw studies burgeoned, conservative legal 
scholars reacted against it, insisting that there was no new cyber jurisdic -
tion or territory or that calls for a new jurisdiction constituted a call for 
“cyber- anarchy” (Goldsmith 1998). Cyberlaw was ridiculed as tantamount 
to the study of “the law of the horse” (Easterbrook 1996). Such an effort, a 
prominent legal scholar proclaimed, was bound to be “shallow and to miss 
unifying principles” (Easterbrook 1996, 207).
Easterbrook was claiming— wrongly as it turned out— that technology 
did not or could not transform societal interactions sufficiently to justify a 
specific analysis of how law related to the technology. This evolved into a 
debate on the sociology of technology. Legal scholars were asking whether 
Internet technology altered laws and institutions or were incorporated into 
established legal principles, just as science and technology studies had for 
some years before been defined by an ongoing debate between realists who 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  63
emphasize the autonomous or deterministic effect of technologies and 
social constructivists who focus on how societal factors shape the final form 
taken by technical systems. Lessig’s (1999a) code- as- law argument was, in 
essence, an attempt by a legal scholar to reinvent the wheel of social studies 
of technology.
A key feature of this period is that the Internet governance field is rooted 
in legal studies. The literature is already addressing issues in international 
relations, institutional theory, science and technology studies, global gov -
ernance, and the role of global civil society, but legal scholars are doing 
most of the work (Kowack [1995] is a rare exception). In retrospect, almost 
every aspect of current issues in Internet governance, including the nexus 
between national security and cybersecurity (Arquilla and Ronfeldt 1993), 
had been posed in some form in these initial years. Yet in this first phase, 
North America is overwhelmingly the center of research and writing. Very 
little attention is paid to the implications of Internet growth and policy to 
other nations or cultures or to how Internet governance might play into 
interstate rivalries.
Phase Two (1996– 2003): ICANN Über Alles
The term “Internet governance” came to prominence in 1996– 1999, when 
it became associated with the struggle to create a new institution to take 
over global coordination of Internet domain names and IP addresses. The 
formation of ICANN took center stage in Internet governance discourse 
and research, and the term “Internet governance” became widely used to 
describe this area.1 Ironically, during the period in which “Internet gover -
nance” becomes widely used as the label for the conflicts over control of 
the root of the domain name system (DNS) and the policy battles associated 
with domain- name trademark conflicts, the term is also actively resisted by 
many involved in the names and numbers debates, especially the techni -
cal community stakeholders.2 In what turns out to be a losing battle, they 
insist that “governance” is a misleading term because the Internet Assigned 
Numbers Authority (IANA) is not the Internet and governance of domain 
name and IP address resources is merely technical management, not gov -
ernance or policy. A seminal book from this period, which published the 
results of a 1996 conference of academics and practitioners around the 
problem of institutionalizing the IANA, was deliberately titled Coordinating 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202564 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
the Internet  and did not refer to governing it (Kahin and Keller 1997). And 
yet, almost all results of searching the LexisNexis Academic database for the 
term “Internet governance” in this period relate to the controversies over 
control of IANA and the formation of ICANN.
Research and writing during this period shifted away from more abstract 
exceptionalism debates to the question of building a real governance institu -
tion. But exceptionalism was often an unstated assumption, in that few actors 
in a position of influence wanted the Internet to be subsumed under exist -
ing intergovernmental regimes. Who, then, would control a global, cen -
tralized institutional framework to coordinate domain name and address 
assignment? How would this institution be structured? How would it be 
made accountable? Fulfilling the expectations and norms of the exception -
alists, the encounter with those problems culminated in an institutional 
innovation, the ICANN (Mueller 2002).
The formation of the ICANN regime resolved conflicts over property 
rights that had been created by attempts to appropriate new global tech -
nical resources (primarily domain names). It also addressed the coordina -
tion problems posed by managing critical Internet resources in a manner 
that would retain global compatibility. As Wolfgang Kleinw ächter noted, 
ICANN was a “silent subversive” because of the way it altered the role of 
states in global governance (Kleinw ächter 2001). Indeed, for a time ICANN 
was hailed as a paradigm of new forms of governance ushered in by the net -
worked age (Ahlert 2001; Hofmann 2005; Levinson 2002). Others, however, 
while recognizing its novelty, mounted strong challenges to the model’s 
legality and legitimacy (Froomkin 2000; Weinberg 2000).
ICANN was controversial because it was a private nonprofit corporation 
unilaterally delegated by the United States to be the global authority over 
the root of the domain name and Internet address spaces and empowered to 
resolve key public policy problems through the issuance of private contracts. 
These contracts were a means of addressing competition policy issues in the 
commercial market for domain names, domain- name trademark conflicts, 
the allocation of Internet addresses, and related problems. Klein and sev -
eral others explore another interesting aspect of the ICANN experiment—  
namely, its early attempt to use global, democratic elections to keep its board 
of directors accountable (Klein 2001; Palfrey 2004; Weinberg 2001).
Given the overarching problematique  of the relationship between inter -
networking and national sovereignty, the role of governments in ICANN’s 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  65
formation has always been a topic of interest, and we begin to see political 
scientists drawn into Internet governance research. Volker Leib and Daniel 
Drezner, for example, examined EU– US interactions in the initial negotia -
tions over ICANN (Drezner 2007; Farrell 2003; Leib 2002). In the real world 
of institutions, this problematique  led to the creation and gradual empow -
erment of ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC). The GAC 
was a strange beast: simultaneously a mini- intergovernmental organization 
composed of representatives of nation- states and an organ of a private Cali -
fornia nonprofit public benefit corporation offering nonbinding advice to 
the organization (Weinberg 2011).
Phase Three (2003– 2009): World Summit on the Information Society  
and Internet Governance Forum
In the 2003– 2009 phase, Internet governance becomes fully recognized as 
a domain of global governance, and the boundaries of what is considered 
Internet governance expand beyond ICANN. In the business world, this 
phase also marks the rise of social media platforms around global corpora -
tions such as Facebook, Twitter, and Google. Large- scale global intermedi -
aries residing on the Internet transform the context in which traditional 
communication policy issues are debated. But the key turning point in 
both research field formation and the actual practice of governance was the 
World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS).
During the WSIS, which lasted from 2002 to 2005, ICANN became the 
provocation for international clashes over the US role in Internet gover -
nance and the position of state and nonstate actors in shaping it. Using 
Google search counts as a metric, we find that the period of the WSIS cor -
responds to the high point of “Internet governance” as a search term with 
currency among the web- using public (figure 3.1). Awareness of Internet 
governance was raised in the developing world and especially among dip -
lomats and government ministries, who had to learn what Internet gover -
nance (and perhaps even what the Internet) was. It led to the creation, in 
2004, of the UN Working Group on Internet Governance (WGIG), which 
was charged with developing a working definition of the term. In the early 
stages of the WSIS process, definitional debates centered on the distinction 
between a narrow approach, encompassing only ICANN- related functions, 
and a broad definition, seeming to include anything and everything related 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202566 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
to information and communication technologies. Both extremes missed 
the mark. Confining concepts of Internet governance to ICANN was jus -
tified by the undeniable fact that DNS and IP governance was central to 
the actual functioning of the global Internet, but it was evident that other 
processes also governed the global Internet, such as standardization bodies, 
trade in services agreements, World Intellectual Property Organization trea -
ties, law enforcement activities related to cybercrime, and so on. On the other 
hand, any attempt to stretch “Internet governance” to include matters like 
the construction of physical telecommunications infrastructure, spectrum 
management, open standards, national e- government initiatives, and the 
like was simply based on an uncritical attempt to conflate all forms of infor -
mation and communication technology with the Internet.
In its agreed definition, the WGIG expanded the meaning of Internet 
governance beyond ICANN, applying the term to any and all “shared prin -
ciples, norms, rules, decision- making procedures, and programmes that 
shape the evolution and use of the Internet” (Drake 2005; MacLean 2004). 
The definition obviously drew on Krasner’s (1983) canonical definition of 
international regimes but, reflecting the enlarged role of nonstate actors in 
managing the Internet, noted that these shared processes involve not just 
governments but business and civil society as well.020406080100120
2004-01
2004-06
2004-11
2005-04
2005-09
2006-02
2006-07
2006-12
2007-05
2007-10
2008-03
2008-08
2009-01
2009-06
2009-11
2010-04
2010-09
2011-02
2011-07
2011-12
2012-05
2012-10
2013-03
2013-08
2014-01
2014-06
2014-11
2015-04
2015-09
2016-02
2016-07
2016-12Search interest over time
(100 = maximum interest)
Figure 3.1
Occurrence of “Internet governance” as a search term worldwide by year.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  67
The WGIG- WSIS definition ratified the position of nonstate actors in 
Internet governance and put many of the traditional problems of commu -
nication and information policy within its frame. Reinforcing this trend, 
in their confrontation with states, ICANN and its defenders found it useful 
to emphasize the open and multistakeholder nature of ICANN processes. 
What had been described as private sector leadership or self- regulation in 
the early days of ICANN’s formation was now repackaged as the multistake -
holder model. Intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations 
and intergovernmental processes such as the WSIS had to be opened up to 
civil society and the private sector. Whereas, before, ICANN’s most power -
ful actors had scorned or marginalized civil society stakeholders, they now 
embraced them as evidence of their relative openness and the superiority 
of its private- sector- led governance model. A new line of research opened 
around multistakeholder governance, and Internet governance researchers 
began to look at other domains such as the environment for precedents and 
at the preexisting literature on transnational governance networks (Cave et 
al. 2007; DeNardis and Raymond 2013; Levinson and Smith 2008; Søren -
son and Torfing 2007).
The literature on the WSIS is large and of uneven quality but contains 
many important insights into international institutions, the participation 
of civil society in global governance, the role of the United States, and of 
course Internet governance itself. One of the ironies of the WSIS is that 
it was supposed to address the full range of communication- information 
policy but ended up becoming almost entirely focused on ICANN and 
Internet governance. A good descriptive analysis of the WSIS process from 
the standpoint of a traditional civil society development advocate and UN 
system insider can be found in Souter (2007). Hans Klein (2004) provides 
a valuable analysis of the politics of the WSIS placed in the context of UN 
summits. Wolfgang Kleinw ächter (2004) and Marc Raboy (2004) provide 
additional participant accounts of the WSIS process, while Mueller (2010) 
examines the post- WSIS Internet governance landscape and emphasizes the 
continuing tension between networks and states as forms of governance.
WSIS created a new set of expectations regarding the ability of civil soci -
ety actors to participate in global Internet governance processes (Padovani 
and Tuzzi 2004; O’Siochru 2004; Raboy 2004). While it often disappointed 
stronger advocates of participatory democracy and failed to resolve the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202568 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
debates about ICANN and the US unilateral role in Internet governance, 
WSIS did create a new institutional vehicle for carrying on discussion and 
debate around those issues: the multistakeholder Internet Governance Forum 
(IGF). There is a huge amount of policy literature and occasional papers 
around the IGF but very little deep scholarly analysis. Malcolm (2008) 
carefully traces the developments of the IGF’s first two years and offers a 
normative analysis of how it can be reformed to fulfill the promise of mul -
tistakeholder governance.
Another immediate result of WSIS was the formation of an academic net -
work specifically devoted to Internet governance research: the Global Internet 
Governance Academic Network (GigaNet) in 2006. In early 2006, during the 
formative stages of the new UN IGF, emails and conversations among a core 
group of academics led to a conclusion that within the post- WSIS environment 
there was no natural home for Internet governance research and education. 
They decided to create their own independent academic platform, introduc -
ing a sometimes awkward separation from the civil society nongovernmental 
organizations with whom they had been connected during the WSIS process. 
GigaNet has held annual symposia showcasing Internet governance research 
concurrently with the IGF every year since the first IGF in 2006.
The dialogue and writing about the appropriate definition of Internet 
governance was not entirely settled by WSIS but continues to this day. To 
some, Internet governance includes only those technical, legal, regulatory 
and policy problems that arise as a direct consequence of the involved par -
ties’ mutual use of the Internet protocols to communicate. Laura DeNardis 
provides a clearly reasoned basis for distinguishing between studies of Inter -
net content and usage and the governance of the Internet per se. “Issues of 
Internet governance relate to Internet- unique technical architecture rather 
than the larger sphere of information and communication technology 
design and policy” (DeNardis, 2014, 19). Another issue is that governance 
in cyberspace is so distributed and indirect that it is often unclear where 
authority to govern lies. Van Eeten and Mueller (2013) initiated a critical 
scholarly debate about whether IGF and other forums in which Internet 
governance is discussed can be considered Internet governance at all. That 
debate is taken up by Hofmann, Katzenbach, and Gollack (2016), who 
attempt to introduce a distinction between governance and regulation.
Whether the IGF constitutes governance or a mere talk shop, it seems to 
have set in motion a process of institutional isomorphism, with multiple 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  69
national and regional Internet governance forums following in its wake 
(Epstein and Nonnecke 2016). Studying these forums, Epstein and Non -
necke develop a distinction between substantive and performative mul -
tistakeholder governance of the Internet. Although the IGF is more of a 
performative multistakeholder Internet governance process, they argue 
that the regional and national Internet governance forums may become 
the link between the UN IGF and local Internet rulemaking.
While WSIS captured the attention of scholars who self- identified as 
Internet governance researchers and analysts, a whole new set of governance 
problems was brewing in the largely noninstitutionalized space formed by 
transnational Internet services and commerce. There was growing awareness 
of the power of states to shape Internet governance, led by an oft- cited work 
by Goldsmith and Wu (2006) arguing that states are still in control and 
everything will return to normal. At the same time, other scholars empha -
sized the ways the Internet had altered the nature of global governance of 
information and communication and that new forms of governance were 
developing.
One key area of development was Internet content regulation— that is, 
blocking and filtering. As nation- states gradually learned how to filter and 
block websites from outside their jurisdiction as an attempt to maintain 
sovereign control of information— and users and external actors explored 
ways to circumvent those barriers— an important empirical body of litera -
ture grew up around efforts by scholars to track and understand these prac -
tices. Ronald Deibert’s Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto developed 
technical tools and methods for the systematic global analysis of Internet 
filtering by states (Deibert et al. 2008, 2010, 2012). Computer scientists 
also joined the fun, using automated Internet measurement techniques to 
collect data on censorship and circumvention practices (Leberknight et al. 
2010; Wolfgarten 2005). Growing attention was also paid to the way private 
intermediaries regulated content (Wagner 2016).
A school of research focused on the economics of information security 
also developed during this period. While this began with a more traditional 
information security focus (Anderson 2001), the growth of cyberspace and 
the movement of ever- more social capabilities onto the Internet meant that 
these researchers increasingly intersected with cybersecurity and Internet 
governance issues, although they rarely used those labels to describe their 
work (Anderson and Moore 2007; Moore 2008). The new field was based on 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202570 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
the insight that the Internet’s security problems are not simply technical 
but are driven by the economic incentives of actors and firms. Work in this 
area feeds into policy discourse by analyzing, for example, the cost- benefit 
trade- offs of Internet service providers’ efforts to secure their networks and 
customers, the assignment of liability to software producers or Internet ser -
vice providers, the impact of network externalities or tragedies of the com -
mons, and the ways in which markets interact with government action in 
response to security problems.
Intermediary liability had been considered an Internet governance issue 
since the earliest days of the commercial Internet (Hardy 1994), but dis -
cussions of the topic became more prevalent with increases in Internet 
usage and the growing profitability of Internet intermediaries. The rise of 
online market intermediaries (e.g., eBay and Amazon), search engines such 
as Google, and social networks such as Facebook and Twitter brought to 
the fore new policy issues around topics such as defamation, copyright and 
counterfeit goods, and e- commerce (see, e.g., Mann and Belzley 2005). In 
this period, the immunity of intermediaries from liability was extensively 
discussed (Lemley 2007). This discussion continued into the fourth phase 
of the field’s evolution, especially with efforts to pressure social media plat -
forms to identify and take down terrorist content and the European Court of 
Justice decision on the right to be forgotten, which forced intermediaries to 
delink materials from their search engine results at the request of a claimant.
The tension between the Internet’s capacity to quickly and easily share 
digital content, on the one hand, and the protection of copyright and 
trademarks, on the other, provided one of the major flashpoints of policy 
conflict and research. Media giants and national and international rights 
protection collectives had the resources to pursue a copyright and trade -
mark protectionist strategy on a global basis. Incumbent copyright holders 
became some of the strongest advocates for imposing policing and enforce -
ment responsibilities on Internet service providers and social media plat -
forms (Bridy 2010; Horten 2012; Mueller, Kuehn, and Santoso 2012). The 
DNS also became an arena where rights holders sought preemptive protec -
tions for rights to names (Froomkin 2002; Galloway and Komaitis 2005).
If the rise of the Internet has mobilized copyright and trademark own -
ers, it also sparked a new social movement that pushed in the opposite 
direction (Benkler 2006; Boyle 1997; Lessig 2005). This access to knowl -
edge (A2K) movement was inspired by institutional analyses that view a 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  71
commons as a desirable governance model (Kranich 2004). Open, nonpro -
prietary access to information was seen as especially appropriate because 
consumption of information is nonrivalrous. The movement had its origins 
in the developers of free and open source software, who pioneered new 
contractual mechanisms deliberately designed to prevent informational 
resources from being privately appropriated (O’Mahony 2003; Raymond 
2001; Stallman 2002; Weber 2004). By the middle of the first decade of the 
2000s, this actor network had become a full- fledged social movement that 
melded the free software movement with critics of the patent system in 
drugs and biotechnology and opponents of copyright and trademark maxi -
malism. The A2K movement, like its opponent, was transnational in scope 
and self- consciously took its cause into international organizations (nota -
bly the World Intellectual Property Organization) and national legislatures 
(May 2007). These two forces had a historic collision in 2011– 2012 over two 
proposed laws in the United States that would have implemented domain-  
name blocking mechanisms similar to China’s in the service of copyright 
enforcement (Benkler et al. 2015; Sell 2013).
Phase Four (2010– ): Surveillance, Securitization, and Alignment
In the fourth phase, ongoing as we write, issues of surveillance, privacy, and 
cybersecurity have become increasingly central to Internet governance poli -
tics and research. The Internet is going through a process of securitization 
(Cavelty 2007; Deibert and Rohozinski 2010), which further reinforces the 
linkages between the nation- state and Internet governance. As this happens, 
interest in and explicit mentions of “Internet governance” in the fields of 
political science and international relations grow exponentially (figure 3.2). 
In the research explicitly focused on the national and transnational power 
implications of the Internet’s vulnerabilities, the term “security” no longer 
refers to more narrow technical forms of security but starts to mean exactly 
what it does in mainstream international relations research. Internet gov -
ernance research now overlaps with studies of war and interstate conflict, 
deterrence, foreign policy, espionage, terrorist groups, and the threat to criti -
cal infrastructures that might be posed through cyberspace vulnerabilities. 
These concerns are often explicitly linked to the international diplomatic 
and policy conflicts over Internet governance (e.g., Segal 2016). Well- known 
international relations (IR) scholars such as Joseph Nye, who were unfamiliar 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202572 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
with the decade of Internet governance research preceding the involvement 
of political scientists, reinvented certain themes, characterizing Internet 
governance as a “regime complex” (Nye 2014). There is even a systematic 
application to cyberspace of the classic IR concepts of the security dilemma 
(Buchanan 2016) and deterrence (Gartzke, Lindsay, and Nacht 2014).
The Edward Snowden revelations, which exposed internal documents 
about the pervasive global surveillance of the US National Security Agency, 
were a watershed in this process. The classified documents confirmed the 
surprisingly large scale and scope of digital surveillance, rekindling long-  
standing debates about privacy, encryption, and the powers of the state 
relative to the individual. But they also solidified the link between military 
and national security and the Internet; reinforced notions that one gov -
ernment, the United States, was preeminent or hegemonic in cyberspace; 
opened the veil on how the United States leveraged the extensive data col -
lection that its private intermediaries gather about their users (Lyon 2014); 
and undermined US moral authority in Internet rights and norms (Farrell 
and Finnemore 2013). Snowden generated new forms of “data national -
ism” from allies and rivals alike (Chander and L ê 2015).
In addition to sparking a vibrant debate about the possibility of a Balkan -
ized or fragmented Internet (Drake, Cerf, and Kleinw ächter 2016; Hill 2012; 020406080100120140160180200
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017Number of publications
Figure 3.2
Occurrence of “Internet governance” in journals in ProQuest political science data -
base by year.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  73
Mueller 2017), the Snowden revelations contributed to a major institutional 
change in Internet governance— namely, the IANA transition (Becker 2019; 
Mueller 2014; Scholte 2016). US control of ICANN via the IANA functions 
contract had been controversial since the early days of WSIS. The post-  
Snowden crisis of legitimacy finally prompted the United States to relinquish 
its control of the DNS root and its contractual control of the IANA func -
tions, owing to fears that many countries would defect from the ICANN- led 
Internet governance regime. The transition also brought in its wake major 
reforms in ICANN’s accountability arrangements (Kruger 2015).
Despite its drift toward state- centric approaches, the cybersecurity litera -
ture does overlap with Internet- governance- related research on networked 
and multistakeholder governance. Empirical research on the actual mecha -
nisms of cybersecurity production reveals a great deal of private action and 
collective action by Internet service providers, standard- setting organiza -
tions, and governments and law enforcement agencies (Asghari et al. 2015). 
Traditional hierarchical state action is the exception rather than the rule 
(Kuerbis and Badiei 2017; Schmidt 2014).
Surveillance and privacy were also key factors in the civilian debate 
over policy responses to the ubiquity of social media. While traditional 
privacy advocates adjusted their norms and policy ideas to the new condi -
tions (Trottier 2016), neo- Marxists spoke of surveillance capitalism as a new 
type of economy (Zuboff 2015, 2019). The governance of data protection 
loomed ever larger in Internet governance, as the right to be forgotten, the 
breakdown of the US- Europe safe harbor agreement, and Europe’s General 
Data Protection Regulation transformed the regulatory environment for 
major platforms offering free services in exchange for the value of users’ 
data (Bennett and Raab 2017).
Data- localization laws were also analyzed as a digital trade issue. Legal 
scholars studied how data localization can affect digital trade and cross- border 
data flow, framing it as a trade barrier without achieving the desired privacy 
and security on the Internet (Chander and L ê 2015). Others took a differ -
ent approach, discussing the legitimacy of data- localization laws by countries 
such as Brazil, India, China, and Russia. Assessing the tension between data 
localization and free trade, Selby argues that data- localization laws engage 
both Internet governance and international trade law (Selby 2017).
Another recent development in the field of Internet governance and 
trade is tech- nationalism. The US attack on Chinese telecommunications 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202574 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
equipment manufacturer Huawei pushes the next generation of mobile tele -
communications into the fray of nation- state rivalry. Russia has also taken an 
approach to the Internet that is explicitly nationalist and sovereign (Stadnik 
2019). These actions against free trade are taken in the name of national secu -
rity and cybersecurity. As nations ramp up more tech- nationalistic tenden -
cies, the effect of sanctions and trade protectionism on technologies that are 
used to operate the Internet might become a more prevalent research topic.
Methodologically, the field trends toward a growing use of computer 
science– based measurement techniques. Some of the most promising new 
research comes from scholars who exploit the information- generating tools 
of the Internet itself to compile and analyze data about the Internet. One 
sees reverse engineering of spyware by Deibert’s Citizen Lab and efforts 
by researchers to gain control of the command- and- control infrastructure 
of a botnet. Scholars of the economics of security such as Tyler Moore 
and Michel van Eeten also are increasingly able to mine huge computer-  
generated databases of phishing activities, routing information, spam 
sources, and the like. It is possible to imagine a broader diffusion and fur -
ther evolution of these methods to bear more directly on the problems of 
Internet governance. This implies a synthesis of technical knowledge and 
social science that is still too rare.
Conclusion
Internet governance as a label and field of study has undergone a remarkable 
evolution over the last 20 years. Once a term applied narrowly to debates 
around the control of the DNS root— and hotly contested and rejected as 
a label even then— it has now become an accepted designator for a broad 
range of policy issues, institutional developments, and geopolitical phe -
nomena. The need to define the term even generated a special UN working 
group as part of a UN summit process.
Figure 3.3 provides an overview of how often “Internet governance” 
occurs in academic and research publication databases. The data are shown 
for four different disciplines: law (from LexisNexis Academic), economics 
(from EconLit database), political science (from ProQuest Political Science 
database, which includes international relations journals), and sociology 
(from ProQuest Sociological Abstracts). From this we can see that the field 
of law has shown the most consistent and sustained interest in Internet 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  75
governance as a topic, ramping up quickly from 2 occurrences in 1996 to 
49 in 2000 and maintaining a rate of about 40– 50 publications per year 
since then. Since 2010, however, political science and international rela -
tions publications have dominated the field in terms of the sheer number 
of publications. We attribute this to the rise of cybersecurity as a policy and 
research preoccupation and the growing perception of Internet governance 
as a geopolitical issue. The amount of interest generated by cybersecurity 
and cyberspace governance in Internet research and political science fields 
testifies to the depth of the challenge Internet connectivity and computer 
technology poses to the traditional form of the state.
Economics and sociology, by way of contrast, have shown the least inter -
est in the topic. Economics articles on the topic typically trickle in at 2 or 
3 a year. Sociology averages around 4 articles a year, although it, like politi -
cal science, shows more activity since 2010, notably a peak of 14 articles 
in 2014 and another spike of 10 in 2017. This is not, of course, because 
economists and sociologists have no interest in the social transformations 
caused by the Internet— it is simply that few of them frame their concerns 
as Internet governance. They are more focused on the evolution of Internet 
industries and the users and uses of the new media, respectively.
We conclude by raising an interesting but possibly uncomfortable ques -
tion about the future of the field. In an article, Michel van Eeten claims that 
the rise of the Internet of Things and pervasive computing0
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
201750100150200250300Number of publications
Law Political science Economics Sociolo gy
Figure 3.3
Occurrence of “Internet governance” in academic journals by year.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202576 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
signal[s] the disappearance of the distinction between devices with and with -
out connectivity and computing capabilities. Without that distinction, it also 
becomes less meaningful to think about cybersecurity governance as a space with 
a certain structural coherence. (2017, 437)
Should the governance of Internet- connected medical devices, for example, be 
considered Internet governance or part of health policy? Are autonomous vehi -
cles handled as Internet governance or transportation policy? As the Internet 
and connected devices become ubiquitous, it is possible that most of the gover -
nance questions will be confronted and resolved in sector- specific ways that fall 
outside the realm of Internet governance. If this happens, ironically, it may be 
that the definition and scope of Internet governance once again reverts to the 
narrow realm of the Internet’s naming, addressing, and routing infrastructure.
Notes
1. Lessig (1999b, 1407) used the term “governance” in a very general sense, and 
when explaining the word he mentioned the procedures for domain name registra -
tion as an Internet governance issue.
2. The NTIA green paper that eventually led to ICANN clearly reflects this tension in the 
following passage: “This discussion draft, shaped by the public input described above, 
provides notice and seeks public comment on a proposal to improve the technical man -
agement of Internet names and addresses. It does not propose a monolithic structure for 
Internet governance. We doubt that the Internet should be governed by one plan or one 
body or even by a series of plans and bodies.” “Improvement of Technical Management 
of Internet Names and Addresses; Proposed Rule,” February 20, 1998, docket number 
980212036- 8036- 01, retrieved from https:// www . ntia . doc . gov / federal - register - notice  
/ 1998  / improvement - technical - management - internet - names - and - addresses - proposed -   .
References
Ahlert, C. (2001). Democr@tic - Global - Governance . net: ICANN als Paradigma neuer 
Formen Internationaler Politik [Democr@tic - global - governance . net: ICANN as a 
paradigm of new forms of international government in cyberspace]. Internationale 
Politik und Gesellschaft, 1 , 66– 78.
Anderson, R. (2001). Why information security is hard— an economic perspective. 
Proceedings of the 17th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference . Retrieved 
from http:// www . cl . cam . ac . uk / ~rja14 / Papers / econ . pdf
Anderson, R., & Moore, T. (2007, January). Information security economics— and 
beyond . Paper presented at the Fourth Bi- Annual Conference on the Economics of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  77
the Software and Internet Industries, Toulouse, France. Retrieved from http:// www  
. cl . cam . ac . uk / ~rja14 / Papers / econ_crypto . pdf
Arquilla, J., & Ronfeldt, D. (1993). Cyberwar is coming! Comparative Strategy, 12 (2), 
141– 165.
Asghari, H., van Eeten, M. J., & Bauer, J. M. (2015). Economics of fighting botnets: 
Lessons from a decade of mitigation. IEEE Security & Privacy, 13 (5), 16– 23.
Barlow, J. P. (1996). A declaration of the independence of cyberspace . Retrieved from 
https:// www . eff . org / cyberspace - independence
Becker, M. (2019). When public principals give up control over private agents: The 
new independence of ICANN in Internet governance. Regulation and Governance, 
13(4), 561– 576.
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets 
and freedom . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Benkler, Y., Roberts, H., Faris, R., Solow- Niederman, A., & Etling, B. (2015). Social 
mobilization and the networked public sphere: Mapping the SOPA- PIPA debate. 
Political Communication, 32 (4), 594– 624.
Bennett, C., & Raab, C. D. (2017). Revisiting “the governance of privacy.” SSRN . 
Retrieved from https:// papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract_id =2972086
Boyle, J. (1996). Shamans, software and spleens: Law and the construction of the informa -
tion society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Boyle, J. (1997). A politics of intellectual property: Environmentalism for the net? 
Duke Law Journal, 47 , 87.
Braman, S. (1995). Policy for the net and the Internet. Annual Review of Information 
Science and Technology, 30 , 5– 75.
Bridy, A. (2010). Graduated response and the turn to private ordering in online 
copyright enforcement. Oregon Law Review, 89 , 81.
Buchanan, B. (2016). The cybersecurity dilemma: Hacking, trust and fear between nations . 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Burk, D. (1995). Trademarks along the infobahn: A first look at the emerging law 
of cybermarks. Richmond Journal of Law and Technology, 1 (1), 1– 6. Retrieved from 
https:// scholarship . richmond . edu / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? referer =https:// scholar  
. google . com /  & httpsredir =1 & article =1003 & context =jolt
Cave, J., Marsden, C., Klautzer, L., Levitt, R., van Oranje, C., Rabinovich, L., & Rob -
inson, N. (2007, March 5). Responsibility in the global information society: Towards 
multi- stakeholder governance. SSRN . Retrieved from https:// ssrn . com / abst ract =2142027
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202578 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
Cavelty, M. D. (2007). Cyber- security and threat politics: US efforts to secure the informa -
tion age . London, UK: Routledge.
Chander, A., & L ê, U. (2015). Data nationalism. Emory Law Journal, 64 , 677.
Deibert, R., Palfrey, J. G., Rohozinski, R., & Zittrain, J. (Eds.). (2008). Access denied: 
The practice and policy of global Internet filtering . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deibert, R., Palfrey, J. G., Rohozinski, R., & Zittrain, J. (Eds.). (2010). Access controlled: 
The shaping of power, rights and rule in cyberspace . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deibert, R., Palfrey, J. G., Rohozinski, R., & Zittrain, J. (Eds.). (2012). Access contested: 
Security, identity and resistance in Asian cyberspace . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deibert, R. J., & Rohozinski, R. (2010). Risking security: Policies and paradoxes of 
cyberspace security. International Political Sociology, 4 (1), 15– 32.
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Raymond, M. (2013). Thinking clearly about multistakeholder Internet 
governance. GigaNet: Global Internet Governance Academic Network, Annual Symposium 
2013 . Retrieved from https:// papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract_id =2354377
Drake, W. J. (Ed.). (2005). Reforming Internet governance: Perspectives from the working 
group on Internet governance . New York, NY: UN ICT Task Force.
Drake, W. J., Cerf, V., & Kleinw ächter, W. (2016, January). Internet fragmentation: An 
overview . Future of the Internet Initiative White Paper. Retrieved from World Eco -
nomic Forum website:  http:// www3 . weforum . org / docs / WEF_FII_Internet_Fragmen  
 tation_An_Overview_2016 . pdf
Drezner, D. (2007). All politics are global: Explaining international regulatory regimes . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Easterbrook, F. H. (1996). Cyberspace and the law of the horse. University of Chicago 
Legal Forum, 1996 , 207– 216.
Epstein, D., & Nonnecke, B. M. (2016). Multistakeholderism in praxis: The case of 
the regional and national Internet Governance Forum (IGF) initiatives. Policy & 
Internet, 8 , 148– 173. doi:10.1002/poi3.116
Farrell, H. (2003). Constructing the international foundations of e- commerce— the 
EU- US safe harbor arrangement. International Organization, 57 (2), 277– 306.
Farrell, H., & Finnemore, M. (2013). The end of hypocrisy: American foreign policy 
in the age of leaks. Foreign Affairs, 92 (6), 22– 26.
Froomkin, A. M. (2000). Wrong turn in cyberspace: Using ICANN to route around 
the APA and the Constitution. Duke Law Journal, 50 (1), 17– 186.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  79
Froomkin, A. M. (2002). ICANN’s UDRP: Its causes and partial cures. Brooklyn Law 
Review, 67 (3), 605– 718.
Galloway, J., & Komaitis, K. (2005). Like Alice in Wonderland: Applying EC compe -
tition principles in the case of domain names. Journal of Information, Law and Tech -
nology, 2005 (2 & 3). Retrieved from https:// warwick . ac . uk / fac / soc / law / elj / jilt / 2005_2  
- 3 / galloway - komaitis
Gartzke, E., Lindsay, J., & Nacht, M. (2014, March). Cross- domain deterrence: Strat -
egy in an era of complexity . Paper presented at the International Studies Association 
Annual Meeting, Toronto, Canada.
Goldsmith, J. (1998). Against cyber- anarchy. University of Chicago Law Review, 65 (4), 
1199– 1250.
Goldsmith, J., & Wu, T. (2006). Who controls the Internet? Illusions of a borderless 
world . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hardy, I. T. (1994). The proper legal regime for “cyberspace.” University of Pittsburgh 
Law Review, 55 , 993– 1055.
Hill, J. F. (2012). Internet fragmentation: Highlighting the major technical, gover -
nance and diplomatic challenges for US policy makers. SSRN . Retrieved from https://  
papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract_id =2439486
Hofmann, J. (2005). Internet Governance: Zwischen staatlicher Autoritat und pri -
vater Koordination. Internationale Politik und Gesellschaft, 3 , 10– 29.
Hofmann, J., Katzenbach, C., & Gollack, K. (2016). Between coordination and 
regulation: Finding the governance in Internet governance. New Media and Soci -
ety, 19  (9), 1406– 1423.
Horten, M. (2012). The copyright enforcement enigma: Internet politics and the ‘telecoms 
package.’  UK: Palgrave MacMillan.
Johnson, D. R., & Post, D. (1996). Law and borders: The rise of law in cyberspace. 
Stanford Law Review, 48 , 1367.
Johnson, D. R., & Post, D. (1997). And how shall the net be governed? A meditation 
on the relative virtues of decentralized, emergent law. In B. Kahin & J. H. Keller 
(Eds.), Coordinating the Internet  (pp. 62– 91). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kahin, B., & Keller, J. H. (Eds.). (1997). Coordinating the Internet . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Klein, H. (2001). Global democracy and the ICANN elections. Info, 3 (4), 255– 257.
Klein, H. (2004). Understanding WSIS: An institutional analysis of the UN world 
summit on the information society. Information Technology and International Develop -
ment, 1 (3– 4), 3– 14.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202580 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
Kleinw ächter, W. (2000). ICANN between technical mandate and political chal -
lenges. Telecommunications Policy, 24 (6), 553– 565.
Kleinw ächter, W. (2001). The silent subversive: ICANN and the new global governance.
Info, 3 (4), 259– 278.
Kleinw ächter, W. (2004). Beyond ICANN vs ITU? How WSIS tries to enter the new 
territory of Internet governance. Gazette, 66 (3– 4), 233– 251.
Kowack, G. (1995). Internet governance and the emergence of global civil society. 
IEEE Communications Magazine, 35 (5), 52– 57.
Kranich, N. (2004). The information commons: A public policy report  (No. 4). New York, 
NY: Free Expression Policy Project, Brennan Center for Justice, NYU School of Law.
Krasner, S. D. (1983). International regimes . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kruger, L. G. (2016, September). The future of Internet governance: Should the 
United States relinquish its authority over ICANN? (CRS Report R44022). Congres -
sional Research Service . Retrieved from https:// fas . org / sgp / crs / misc / R44022 . pdf
Kuerbis, B., and Badiei, F. (2017). Mapping the cybersecurity institutional landscape. 
Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, 19 (6), 466– 492.
Leberknight, C., Chiang, M., Poor, H. V., Wong, F. (2010, December 31). A taxonomy 
of Internet censorship and anti- censorship . Draft Version. Retrieved from http:// www  
. princeton . edu / ~chiangm / anticensorship . pdf
Leib, V. (2002). ICANN- EU can’t: Internet governance and Europe’s role in the 
formation of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). 
Communication Abstracts, 25 (6), 755– 909.
Lemley, M. A. (2007). Rationalizing Internet safe harbors. Journal of Telecommunica -
tions and High Technology Law, 6 , 101.
Lessig, L. (1999a). Code and other laws of cyberspace . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lessig, L. (1999b). Open code and open societies: Values of Internet governance. 
Chicago- Kent Law Review, 74 , 1405.
Lessig, L. (2005). Free culture: The nature and future of creativity . New York, NY: Penguin.
Lewis, P. H. (1994, October 24). U.S. begins privatizing Internet’s operations. The 
New York Times .
Levinson, N. S. (2002). Internet governance and institutional change. The Tocqueville 
Review/La Revue Tocqueville, 23 (2), 125– 141.
Levinson, N., & Smith, H. (2008, August 28). The Internet governance ecosystem: Assess -
ing multistakeholderism and change . Paper presented at the American Political Science 
Association 2008 Annual Meeting, Hynes Convention Center, Boston. Retrieved 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  81
from http://195.130.87.21:8080/dspace/bitstream/123456789/1020/1/The%20inter  
net%20governance%20ecosystem%20assessing%20multistakeholderism%20and%20
change.pdf
Lyon, D. (2014). Surveillance, Snowden, and big data: Capacities, consequences, 
critique. Big Data & Society, 1 (2). doi:10.1177/2053951714541861
MacLean, D. (Ed.). (2004). Internet governance: A grand collaboration . New York, NY: 
UN ICT Task Force.
Malcolm, J. (2008). Multi- stakeholder governance and the Internet Governance Forum . 
Wembley, Australia: Terminus Press.
Mann, R. J., and Belzley, S. R. (2005). The promise of Internet intermediary liability. 
William and Mary Law Review, 47 , 239.
May, C. (2007). The World Intellectual Property Organization and the development 
agenda. Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations, 
13(2), 161– 170.
Moore, T. (2008). Cooperative attack and defense in distributed networks  (Report No. UCAM-  
CL- TR- 718). Cambridge, UK: University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory.
Mueller, M. (2002). Ruling the root: Internet governance and the taming of cyberspace . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. (2010). Networks and states: The global politics of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. (2014). Detaching Internet governance from the state: Globalizing the 
IANA. Georgetown Journal of International Affairs , 35– 44.
Mueller, M. (2017). Will the Internet fragment? Sovereignty, globalization and cyberspace . 
London, UK: Polity.
Mueller, M., Kuehn, A., & Santoso, S. M. (2012). Policing the network: Using DPI for 
copyright enforcement. Surveillance & Society, 9 (4), 348– 364.
Nye, J. S. (2014). The regime complex for managing global cyber activities . Global Com -
mission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 1). Centre for International 
Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline  
. org / sites / default / files / gcig_paper_no1 . pdf
O’Mahony, S. (2003). Guarding the commons: How community managed software 
projects protect their work. Research Policy, 32 (7), 1179– 1198.
O’Siochru, S. (2004). Civil society participation in the WSIS process: Promises and 
reality. Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 18 (3), 330– 344.
Padovani, C., & Tuzzi, A. (2004). Global civil society and the world summit on 
the information society: Reflections on global governance, participation and the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202582 M. L. Mueller and F. Badiei
changing scope of political action. Social Science Research Council . Retrieved from 
https:// ecpr . eu / Filestore / PaperProposal / 268396ec - ddf8 - 4df3 - bd32 - 763d314d6c65  
. pdf
Palfrey, J. (2004). The end of the experiment: How ICANN’s foray into global Inter -
net democracy failed. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 17 (2)
Perritt, H. H., Jr. (1996). Jurisdiction in cyberspace. Villanova Law Review, 41 , 1.
Raboy, M. (2004). The WSIS as a political space in global media governance. Con-
tinuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 18 (3), 345– 359.
Raymond, E. S. (2001). The cathedral and the bazaar: Musings on Linux and open source 
by an accidental revolutionary  (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly.
Resnick, D. (1997). Politics on the Internet: The normalization of cyberspace. New 
Political Science , 47– 68.
Resnick, P., & Miller, J. (1996). PICS: Internet access controls without censorship. 
Communications of the ACM, 39 (10), 87– 93.
Samuelson, P. (1996). The copyright grab. Wired . Available at http:// works . bepress  
. com / pamela_samuelson / 240 /
Schmidt, A. (2014). Hierarchies in networks: Emerging hybrids of networks and hier -
archies for producing Internet security. In Cyberspace and international relations  (pp. 
181– 202). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Scholte, J. A. (2016). Process and power in Internet governance. Reflections on the 
IANA transition. RIPE, Amsterdam . Available at https:// ripe72 . ripe . net / presentations  
/ 20 - ripe - 72 . pdf
Segal, A. (2016). The hacked world order: How nations fight, trade, maneuver, and manip -
ulate in the digital age . New York, NY: PublicAffairs.
Selby, J. (2017). Data localization laws: Trade barriers or legitimate responses to 
cybersecurity risks, or both? International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 
25(3), 213– 232.
Sell, S. K. (2013). Revenge of the “nerds”: Collective action against intellectual property 
maximalism in the global information age. International Studies Review, 15 (1), 67– 85.
Sørenson, E., & Torfing, J. (Eds.). (2007). Theories of democratic network governance . 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Souter, D. (2007). Whose summit? Whose information society? Developing coun -
tries and civil society at the world summit on the information society. Association 
for Progressive Communications. Retrieved from http:// www . apc . org / en / pubs /  manuals  
/ governance / all / whose - summit - whose - information - society
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Inventing Internet Governance  83
Stadnik, I. (2019). Sovereign RUnet: What does it mean? Internet Governance Project, 
Georgia Institute of Technology. Retrieved from https:// www . internetgovernance  
. org / research / sovereign - runet - what - does - it - mean /
Stallman, R. (2002). Free software, free society: Selected essays of Richard M. Stall -
man. Boston, MA: Free Software Foundation.
Trottier, D. (2016). Social media as surveillance: Rethinking visibility in a converg -
ing world. London, UK: Routledge.
UNDP. (1997). Human Development Report, 1997. New York, NY: United Nations 
Development Program.
van Eeten, M. J. (2017). Patching security governance: An empirical view of emergent 
governance mechanisms for cybersecurity. Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, 
19, 6.
van Eeten, M. J., and Mueller, M. (2013). Where is the governance in Internet gover -
nance? New Media & Society, 15 (5), 720– 736.
Wagner, B. (2016). Global free expression— governing the boundaries of Internet content . 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Weber, S. (2004). The success of open source . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weinberg, J. (2000). ICANN and the problem of legitimacy. Duke Law Journal, 50 , 187.
Weinberg, J. (2001). Geeks and Greeks, Info, 3(4) 313– 332.
Weinberg, J. (2011). Governments, privatization, and privatization: ICANN and the 
GAC. Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review, 18 , 1.
Wolfgarten, S. (2005). Investigating large- scale Internet content filtering . (Unpublished 
master’s thesis). Dublin City University, Ireland. Retrieved from http:// citeseerx . ist  
. psu . edu / viewdoc / download ? doi =10 . 1 . 1 . 133 . 5778 & rep =rep1 & type =pdf
Wu, T. S. (1997). Cyberspace sovereignty? The Internet and the international system. 
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, 10 (3), 647– 666.
Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: Surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an informa -
tion civilization. Journal of Information Technology, 30 (1), 75– 89.
Zuboff, S. (2019). The age of surveillance capitalism: The fight for the future at the new 
frontier of power . New York, NY: Profile Books.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Research seeking to bridge Internet governance research with approaches in 
science and technology studies (STS) began growing in the second decade of 
the 2000s. Complementary to predominantly institutional approaches that 
set the agenda for Internet governance research in its early days— and are still 
prominently featured in it— STS approaches consider the agency of technol -
ogy designers, policy makers, and users as they interact, in a distributed fash -
ion, with technologies, rules, and regulations, leading to consequences with 
systemic effects that may, at times, be unintended. Social and political order -
ing is understood as a set of ongoing and contested processes— an ensemble of 
mundane practices that contribute to maintaining, hacking, circumventing, 
developing, testing, or using the Internet. Thus, conceptually, STS- informed 
Internet governance research relies on understanding governance as a nor -
mative system of systems, and it acknowledges the agency, often discreet yet 
pervasive, of both human and nonhuman actors and infrastructures. This 
chapter provides an overview of the current ways in which STS approaches 
are being applied to Internet governance research, and in particular, it focuses 
on controversy studies and infrastructure studies as two subsets of conceptual 
and methodological tools that are gaining increasing traction.
The chapter opens by retracing how STS first approached the Internet as 
a subject of study and examining how some key concepts in STS have found 
their way into Internet studies. It then proceeds to discuss the key aspects of 
applying an STS- informed analytical and empirical framework to Internet 
governance research, including assemblages and hybrid arrangements as 
means of “ordering” in Internet governance and the structural and perfor -
mative effects of controversies on norm- making and decision- making.
In its second part, the chapter addresses more closely how STS- informed 
approaches to Internet governance analyze the structuring and performative 4 Science and Technology Studies Approaches to  
Internet Governance: Controversies and Infrastructures  
as Internet Politics
Francesca Musiani
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202586 F. Musiani
effects of controversies on governance. It considers how controversies around 
claims of doing Internet governance (Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016), 
made by different actors or groups, contribute to the creation of different 
worlds in which specific notions of governance make sense. The chapter will 
discuss how the study of controversies unpacks governance as a theoretical 
and operational concept by exposing the plurality of notions it refers to and 
their potential conflicts (Cheniti 2009a; Ziewitz and Pentzold 2014).
Finally, the chapter discusses how STS approaches to Internet governance 
focus on the agency of nonhuman actors and infrastructures as loci of gov -
ernance mediation, such as information intermediaries, critical Internet 
resources, Internet exchange points, and surveillance and security devices 
(Musiani et al. 2016). The chapter will address how Internet governance takes 
shape through a myriad of technical architectures and infrastructures, “con -
trol points” (DeNardis 2014, 11) that are often discreet and invisible yet nev -
ertheless crucial in building the increasingly public and articulate network 
of networks.
The chapter concludes by assessing the applicability of the STS lens to the 
study of Internet governance and its intersections with other approaches to 
Internet governance studies.
STS Meet Internet Studies: Introducing Dispositifs  and  
Boundary Objects in the Study of the Internet
As Sandra Braman highlights in chapter 2, it may now be almost an aca -
demic given that the Internet is socio- technical in nature; however, it is 
often useful to recall this, as it reminds us that all processes carried out 
on and by means of the Internet have both a technical and a human 
component— including governance approaches. Indeed, as seminal articles 
such as DiMaggio et al.’s (2001) at the turn of the millennium have made 
explicit, the Internet as a research subject has “social implications” that 
make its analysis thoroughly relevant for social scientists.
Approaches issued from STS are among the tools that social science 
researchers have mobilized to investigate the complex nexus of Internet 
and society. Janet Abbate notes that
STS can be useful to address the complex links between Internet technology and 
culture, which have blurred the frontiers of traditional categories. One of STS’ 
tenets is to “open the black box” of technology to understand its functioning, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  87
and understand how social relations and aims translate into artifacts. STS sim -
ilarly offer models to describe how human and non- human actors exert joint 
agency in mediated environments. (2012, 170)
The STS turn in research addressing information and communica -
tion technologies is founded in the sociology of innovation’s interest 
in technical objects and in social practices of appropriation of emerging 
technologies, in media sociology’s increasing interest in information and 
communication technologies, and in the development of information and 
communication sciences: information and communication technologies 
become “interactional artifacts” (de Fornel 1994, 126). With the advent of 
the Internet, an object- centered, interdisciplinary field of study follows at 
the end of the 1990s, with the creation of Internet studies. The “STS turn” 
within this field calls for a particular attention paid to context and situ -
ated practices, the unveiling of the invisible work of Internet innovation, 
to paraphrase Susan Leigh Star (1999). STS approaches put emphasis on the 
practices that shape the management and governance of the Internet and 
its uses as a living reality, and they determine the ways in which it operates, 
works, resists, and functions. Furthermore, STS approaches invite consid -
eration of values and rationalities of Internet and web practitioners not as 
indicators  of how they perceive the world but as resources and categories  that 
they deploy in specific circumstances in order to create and uphold specific 
configurations— in short, to actively organize their world (Cheniti 2009a).
STS have helped recognize technical artifacts’ status as mediators inas -
much as they can modify the performativity of social actions. In this concep -
tion, it makes less sense to consider discourses and objects as separate spheres 
and more sense to understand discourses as circulating within objects, both 
spheres coconstructing each other (Gillespie, Boczkowski, and Foot 2014).
The notion of dispositif  (in the Foucaldian sense, often translated as 
“device” in English) and boundary object are among the notable concepts 
at the intersection of Internet studies and STS. A socio- technical dispositif  
is defined as an assemblage of human and nonhuman actors, whose com -
petencies and performances are distributed and whose existence is enabled 
by the workings of innovation. Moreover, the notion allows integration of 
agency (Proulx 2009) in the analysis for a more fine- grained appreciation of 
its collective dimension. With the concept of boundary object, Susan Leigh 
Star and James Griesemer (1989) have sought to analytically describe those 
processes in which actors coming from different social worlds, and called 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202588 F. Musiani
on to cooperate, manage to coordinate despite their diverging points of 
view. Because they account for the processes of delegation of work or other 
activities, or for the performative action of artifacts in the production of 
knowledge, boundary objects allow us to conceptualize the work of coordi -
nation, alignment, alliance, and translation among the different actors and 
the worlds they mobilize (Trompette and Vinck 2010).
These notions— which are both concepts and practical methodological 
tools— have been recognized as useful, alongside approaches in political 
science, international law, and economics, for tackling the macro questions 
of politics and power related to Internet governance by unpacking the 
micro practices of governance as mechanisms of distributed, semiformal, or 
reflexive coordination (Hofmann, Katzenbach, and Gollatz 2016), private 
ordering (Elkin- Koren 2012), and use of Internet resources.
STS Meet Internet Governance
Devices and boundary objects are just two among the concepts and tools that 
STS scholars have developed to study social order, an “effect generated by het -
erogeneous means” (Law 1992, 382), making the actual, continuous processes  
of ordering— of economic, political, discursive, technical, or other nature—  
the main focus of scientific inquiry. In this context, governance is understood 
as a set of dynamics of social ordering, which does not happen exclusively 
(and, possibly, not primarily) in politically designed institutions but is also 
enacted through mundane practices of people engaged in maintaining or 
challenging the social order (Flyverbom 2016; Woolgar and Neyland 2013). 
This approach to the study of social order implies new ways to question and 
reassemble what we think of as both the Internet  and governance . Indeed, this 
sensibility for social order as continuous and contested processes translates 
into a growing attention to the mundane practices of all those involved in 
providing and maintaining, hacking and undermining, developing and test -
ing, or simply using the network of networks (Musiani 2015), thus expanding 
the notion of governance in Internet governance.1 These diverse practices are 
seen not as mere objects of regulation but as elements constitutive to articulat -
ing, reifying, and challenging established, emerging, or contested norms— it is 
the “doing” of Internet governance (Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016).
It is also argued that an STS lens relieves the pressure of pursuing a sin -
gle precise definition or perimeter of Internet governance as a mandatory 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  89
prerequisite to any meaningful enquiry (Ziewitz and Pentzold 2014). Instead, 
STS approaches mostly consider the assumptions deriving from this opera -
tion as deterring the understanding of how Internet governance is enacted, 
in pervasive, networked, and often invisible ways.
Conceptually, STS- informed Internet governance research relies on 
understanding it as a normative system of systems, and it acknowledges 
the agency, often discreet and pervasive, of both human and nonhuman 
actors and infrastructures. Empirically, STS- informed Internet governance 
research focuses on the dynamics of ordering of assemblages and hybrid 
arrangements of Internet governance; on the structural and performative 
effects of controversies and destabilizations on norm making and decision-  
making or on the construction of authority and trust; and finally, on hybrid 
forums, private arrangements, and users and their practices. All these com -
ponents help flesh out the doing of Internet governance and may be of use 
in revisiting central, yet ill- defined, concepts such as multistakeholderism. 
Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani (2016) unpack those key aspects, a dis -
cussion that I reprise and expand on here.
First, STS approaches acknowledge that technical and political governance 
are becoming increasingly intertwined. Scholars of Internet governance, and 
not only from STS, acknowledge more and more broadly the plurality of 
these modes of governance (two notable examples in this book are chapter 
2 by Braman and chapter 6 by Hall and her coauthors); the next step is to 
incorporate their inability to be fully separated. STS approaches plead for an 
understanding of Internet governance as coexistence of different types of 
norms, elaborated in a variety of partially juxtaposed forums, and enforced, 
implemented, or merely suggested via a plurality of normative systems: 
law, technology, markets, discourses, and practices (Brousseau, Marzouki, 
and M éadel 2012). In chapter 10, Ten Oever and colleagues provide a use -
ful overview of the mosaic that constitutes this multiplicity of normative 
sources and rightly point out that some normative features that had not 
been technically built into the Internet in its early days (because, of course, 
several of its spectacular developments could not be foreseen) subsequently 
had to be retroengineered in the network of networks or compensated for 
by other normative sources.
Acknowledging these diverse origins of norms relevant for the use and 
design of the Internet, most STS- informed Internet governance researchers 
base their understanding of governance in ordering instead of regulation, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202590 F. Musiani
management, or control (Elkin- Koren 2012; Flyverbom 2011). According 
to them, the concept of ordering not only captures the normative effect of 
mundane practices and daily routines; it is also considered particularly well 
suited to the analysis of the organizational forms of global politics not as 
static entities but as assemblages— hybrid configurations constantly reshap -
ing their purposes and procedures so as to connect and mobilize objects, 
subjects, and other elements around particular issues. In this light, the 
very institutions of Internet governance can also be explored with an STS-  
informed toolbox, as Mikkel Flyverbom (2011) has done for the United 
Nations, seeking to capture the complexity of global political governance 
arrangements as embedded practices.
An important feature of STS approaches is the investigation of nonhu -
man actors and infrastructures as loci of mediation. Indeed, information 
intermediaries, critical Internet resources, Internet exchange points, and sur -
veillance and security devices play a crucial governance role alongside politi -
cal, national and supranational institutions, and civil society organizations 
(Musiani et al. 2016). Internet governance takes shape through a myriad of 
infrastructures, devices, data fluxes and technical architectures that are often 
in the backstage, yet crucial in building the increasingly public and articu -
late network of networks. Laura DeNardis (2014, 11) defines these entities as 
infrastructural “control points,” around which are entangled matters of tech -
nical and economic efficiency, as well as negotiations over human and soci -
etal values such as intellectual property rights, privacy, security, transparency.
Scholarly and policy discussions on “governing algorithms” and account -
ability of algorithms connect with this aspect and explore the governing 
power of algorithms (Mager 2012; Ziewitz 2016) as they predict and per -
sonalize users’ behavior on the Internet and the perception other actors 
(institutions, firms) have of them. In line with this approach, and a little 
less recently, STS contributions have brought an important contribution to 
the study of the privatization of Internet governance (which Laura DeNardis 
has explored in several scholarly contributions, the latest in chapter 1)— that 
is, how decisions and actions that apply to governance are increasingly 
taken by private entities, in particular by the handful of giant tech com -
panies such as Google and Facebook that, because of their size and quasi-  
monopolistic status, are in the position of setting de facto standards in 
policy- related arenas. As Rikke Frank Jørgensen explains in chapter 8, the 
privatization of Internet governance also poses methodological challenges 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  91
for the (STS) researcher, due to the heavy dimension of industrial secrecy 
surrounding the activities of tech giants. Furthermore, as Hall and col -
leagues underline in chapter 6, the omnipresence, pervasiveness, and sheer 
amount of data produced and available in digital form, and the multiplicity 
of methods at the disposal of Internet companies to make sense of it, add 
further implications to the privatization of Internet governance in terms of 
informational asymmetry, privacy challenges, and surveillance.
Another way in which STS approaches add to institutional perspectives on 
Internet governance is the acknowledgment of the central role of invisible, 
mundane, and taken- for- granted practices in the constitution of design, regu -
lation, and use of technology. It calls attention to, for example, acts of indi -
viduals in articulating Internet standards and to how instability was built into 
the early Internet so as to ensure the possibility of constant change (Braman 
2016), the social aspects of crafting and enacting Internet- related policy, and 
how nontraditional forms of participation in discourse about Internet gov -
ernance issues (i.e., multistakeholderism) become institutionalized (Epstein 
2013). This part of STS approaches suggests that governance of the Internet, as 
a socio- technical system, is a social dynamic as well as a political one.
STS- informed approaches to Internet governance also address the struc -
turing and performative effects of controversies on governance. Most prom -
inently, they analyze how controversies around claims, made by different 
actors or groups, about “doing Internet governance” actually contribute 
to the creation of different worlds where specific notions of governance 
make sense (Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016). Thus, the study of 
controversies unpacks governance as a theoretical and operational concept 
by exposing the plurality of notions it refers to and the consequences of 
their being in conflict (Cheniti 2009a; Ziewitz and Pentzold 2014). The very 
processes by which norms are created, renegotiated, put to the test, and 
realigned and raise conflicts are as crucial— and perhaps more crucial— in 
STS perspectives as the stabilized norms themselves (De Filippi and Love -
luck 2016; Musiani, Mallard, and M éadel 2018).
As hinted earlier in the chapter, several concepts brought in by the STS 
toolbox can help unveil a number of situated practices on, by, and for the 
Internet that arguably constitute a vital part of doing Internet governance. 
For example, understanding Internet governance through the lens of Callon, 
Lascoumes, and Barthe’s hybrid forums (2009)— entities meant to transform 
controversies into productive dialogue and bring about democracy— can 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202592 F. Musiani
enrich and revisit the concept of multistakeholderism (Malcolm 2008) by 
putting emphasis on actors’ positioning and their evolving relationships to 
one another. The technology- embedded nature of most types of private sector 
interventions in Internet governance can be brought to the foreground by STS 
methods. Examining the relationship of Internet users with their devices and 
the values they embed does governance inasmuch as it reflects their commit -
ment to a set of norms and to a community (Elkin- Koren 2012).
The final part of this chapter addresses in more detail two of these key 
aspects that, given the current social, economic, and political context in 
which the Internet as a device- of- devices is placed, we consider as particu -
larly important and gaining traction among the lenses on Internet gover -
nance. The first is the structuring and performative effect of controversies 
on governance; the second is the agency of nonhuman actors and infra -
structures as loci where governance is enacted and mediated.
Controversies and Their Performative Role in Internet Governance
Since the very early days of the Internet, being on and managing the net -
work of networks has been about exercising control over particular func -
tions of it that provide certain actors with the power and opportunity to 
act to their advantage; on the other hand, there is very rarely a single way 
to implement these functions or a single actor capable of controlling them. 
Thus, the Internet is controversial and contested, both target and instru -
ment of governance, object of interest of a myriad of actors: from the most 
powerful and centralized to the average Internet user. Infrastructure can 
be understood as a fundamental place to exercise economic and political 
power (DeNardis and Musiani 2016, 3). Exposing these manifestations of 
power, which is often implicit and overlooked, is crucial in revealing con -
flicts and controversies about what an infrastructure is, who can benefit 
from it, or who can challenge it (Bernards and Campbell- Verduyn 2019).
Studying Internet- governance- related controversies (Pinch and Leuen -
berger 2006) is becoming one of the principal STS- informed ways to unpack 
Internet governance. Indeed, the Internet exhibits an increasing amount 
of contestation, in areas such as the interconnection agreements between 
Internet service providers (Meier- Hahn 2015), the debate around net neu -
trality (Marsden 2017), the use of deep packet inspection (Mueller, Kuehn, 
and Santoso 2012), the deployment of content filtering technologies 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  93
(Deibert and Crete- Nishihata 2012), ubiquitous surveillance measures, and 
the use of the DNS for regulatory aims (DeNardis and Hackl 2015). Fur -
thermore, contentious politics, activism, and citizen- led protests are often 
embedded in the Internet and its applications, illustrated, for example, by 
the work of Milan and Ten Oever (2017) on civil society engagement within 
ICANN so as to encode human rights into Internet infrastructure or Ksenia 
Ermoshina’s (2016) research on the shaping and use of citizen-  and activist-  
oriented mobile and web applications and how the design of these tools 
shapes citizen participation and citizen- state interaction.
To put it in the words of Ziewitz and Pentzold (2010), controversies 
unveil different versions, according to different actors, of the worlds where 
notions of governance take place. Thus, for the analyst, the negotiations 
and controversies that take place around claims of “Internet governanc-  
ing” (Cheniti 2009b) can be viewed as performative, inasmuch as they “both 
implicate and are implicated in creating the worlds in which a mode of 
governance makes sense” (Ziewitz and Pentzold 2010, 20).
Internet governance is particularly suited to all kinds of exit strategies 
and evolutions in power balances; thus, consensus- based modes of regula -
tion become central, as norms cannot be totally binding and are perma -
nently negotiated and challenged (Brousseau, Marzouki, and M éadel 2012, 
35). As a consequence, the very processes by which norms evolve— put to 
the test and made the subject of conflict and realignment, destabilization 
and restabilization— become central because they provide different types of 
guarantees to the various stakeholders. Digital technologies themselves play 
a key role in this legitimation process because they become not only facili -
tators but guarantors of fairness and neutrality in controversial moments 
of these processes, as illustrated by research on the blockchain subtending 
Bitcoin (Musiani et al. 2018). In doing so, they also perform trust, both by 
automating procedures and by keeping track of all actions.
Contrary to what some institutional approaches may suggest, contro -
versy, unsettling, destabilization, and restabilization are important parts of 
Internet governance institutions as well. For example, as Flyverbom (2011) 
shows, the Internet Governance Forum and other Internet governance 
organizational arrangements would not have been born without ample 
reconfigurations of two UN- linked entities (the Working Group on Inter -
net Governance and Information and Communication Technologies Task 
Force). If examined through an STS lens, institutions show their ability to 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202594 F. Musiani
renegotiate and reconfigure themselves in moments of controversy in order 
to maintain momentum and, ultimately, authority. If not analyzed in such 
a light, the authority of Internet governance institutions would “otherwise 
come across as faits accomplis” (Flyverbom 2011, 6). Furthermore, as Julia 
Pohle (2016) argues, by focusing the analysis on actors’ positionings and 
negotiations, and on processes rather than outcomes, it is possible to shed 
light on the contribution of multistakeholder processes and the validity of 
their results, albeit in the absence of binding outcomes.
Internet governance controversies and battles happen most of the time 
over “control points,” as illustrated by Laura DeNardis (2014, 11). These 
control points range from the deepest layers of Internet infrastructure to 
the “last mile” of user access to the network, from the blocking of finan -
cial flows to the deliberate “kill- switches” of Internet- based services, from 
the “graduated response” termination of domestic Internet access to the 
attempted use of the DNS for copyright enforcement purposes, and from 
the Internet’s backbone infrastructure to the establishment of interconnec -
tion agreements. They also include the de facto public policy role assumed 
by private information intermediaries, in the many ways they gather, col -
lect, aggregate, select, and present data to users and to other actors of the 
Internet value chain— thereby enacting governance over privacy, freedom 
of expression, cultural diversity, and reputation (DeNardis 2012, 2014).
Infrastructure as Enacting and Mediating Governance
The term “infrastructure,” as Sandra Braman’s chapter 2 notes, is a poten -
tially all- encompassing term that may be excessively vague without a defi -
nition. It commonly refers to the collective equipment necessary to human 
organization and activity, such as buildings, roads, bridges, and communi -
cations networks— in short, fully material and concrete artifacts. However, 
when it comes to the Internet (and its governance), Geoffrey Bowker and 
colleagues note that “beyond bricks, mortar, pipes or wires, infrastructure 
also encompasses more abstract entities, such as protocols (human and 
computer), standards, and memory,” as well as “digital facilities and ser -
vices … [such as] computational services, help desks, and data repositories 
to name a few” (Bowker et al. 2010, 97– 98).
According to a body of work that draws inspiration from the research 
of Bowker and that of his colleagues, in particular Susan Leigh Star, the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  95
infrastructural quality of the network of networks is relational and condi -
tional; infrastructures can be more usefully understood in terms of function 
than form. Thus, beyond objects whose infrastructural aspect is immediately 
obvious, such as bridges or pipes, a number of artifacts and entities that pop -
ulate and shape the network of networks could be described as infrastructure 
because they have an infrastructural function — because they help structure, 
shape, enable, or constrain our being together on and with the Internet. In 
this sense, Internet infrastructures include physical objects— for example, 
submarine cables that carry global telecommunications, data centers that 
host digital content, and objects that are a priori much less concrete, such as 
the Internet protocol that allows the blockchain underlying Bitcoin to work.
A whole tradition of STS have explored the social and organizational 
dimensions of infrastructure of information and communication tech -
nologies, intended, thus, in these multiple senses of not only the purely 
material artifacts but also their logistical substrata. In particular, STS schol -
ars have highlighted features that are of interest when studying complex 
socio- technical systems— for example, that infrastructure typically exists in 
the background, is invisible, and is frequently taken for granted (Star and 
Ruhleder 1994). Thus, it is argued, the politics inscribed in infrastructure by 
means of design and technical encodings is similarly difficult to trace. Yet it 
is an important task because the design of the “plumbing” of the Internet 
(Musiani 2012), the underlying practices, uses, and exchanges in a networked 
system, informs its adoption and (re)appropriation by users, its regulation, 
and its organizational forms. Several bodies of work, crossing Internet studies 
with the branch of STS called infrastructure studies, have sought to explore 
the social and organizational qualities of infrastructures subtending informa -
tion networks and to find the materiality in the virtual of software and code 
(Blanchette 2011; Fuller 2008; Marino 2006). New concepts to account for 
the agency of infrastructure have been proposed, such as Annalisa Pelizza’s 
“vectorial glance” (2016), which explores how interoperability of informa -
tion systems, as a performative process of boundary reordering, redistributes 
authority and accountability: the small technical operations of interoperabil -
ity projects become strategic sites where institutional shifts become visible.
STS- informed perspectives examining infrastructures have proliferated, 
but they at first received comparatively little attention from scholars of 
Internet governance , the pioneer in this regard having been Laura DeNardis 
with her article “Hidden Levers of Internet Control” (2012). They are now 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202596 F. Musiani
an important part of Internet governance scholarship, as contributions by 
Braman (2016) and Malcic (2016), on the work of the Internet’s early design -
ers, and De Filippi and Loveluck (2016), on the mixed technical and social 
governance subtending Bitcoin, have shown. In these contributions, Internet 
governance is understood as a set of socio- technical processes of innovation, 
digitalization, regulation, mobilization, co- optation, and circumvention.
Furthermore, contributions drawing from STS approaches in recent years 
have recognized not only that administrative and coordinating functions 
related to Internet infrastructure have always been instruments of power 
(DeNardis 2009) but that points of infrastructural control, regardless of their 
originally intended function, can serve as proxies to regain (or gain) control of 
or manipulate the flow of money, information, and the marketplace of ideas 
in the digital sphere— a phenomenon that has been called the “turn to infra -
structure in Internet governance” (Musiani et al. 2016). This body of work 
addresses, for example, the use of the DNS as a tool for intellectual property 
rights enforcement (Merrill 2016) or information intermediaries’ discretion -
ary power to set their infrastructural practices to prioritize strategic interests 
over privacy commitments (Sargsyan 2016). Put together, these contribu -
tions show a shift from a “values- in- design” approach (Flanagan, Howe, and 
Nissenbaum 2008) to a politicization of Internet governance infrastructures 
(DeNardis 2009). That is to say, while values have entered the design of infra -
structure for a long time, these values have been incorporated into techno -
logical infrastructure mostly to carry out its core functions; instead, the use 
of Internet infrastructure to carry out functions other than their intended 
objective can lead to important collateral damage for the stability and secu -
rity of the Internet and the protection of online civil liberties (DeNardis and 
Musiani 2016). STS approaches, with their attention to situated practice and 
infrastructural agency, are well suited to bring these aspects to the foreground.
What Can STS Approaches Do for Internet Governance Research?
STS- informed analyses of the construction, materiality, and controversial 
potential of digital infrastructures offer new insights into the scope and 
limits of Internet- related technological change and its governance potential 
for at least two reasons.
First, the emphasis on the infrastructural nature of socio- technical systems 
makes it possible to shed new light on how the applications of alternative 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  97
and emerging technologies mingle with dominant actors, objects, and pro -
cesses. Infrastructure, as Star (1999, 382) puts it, does not develop from 
scratch but struggles with the inertia of what is already stabilized and inher -
its its strengths and limitations. Approaches to Internet infrastructure and 
its political weight also help explicitly highlight the contested and relational 
nature of technological change. New technologies do not change Internet 
operations on their own. On the contrary, technological change is mediated 
through fundamentally political struggles over the functioning and nature of 
the systems required to perform these infrastructural functions.
Second, highlighting efforts to position networked digital systems as 
material and infrastructural invites us to consider the contradictions of tech -
nological change. The denaturalization of socio- technical systems, making 
them black boxes, draws attention to these systems being flawed and subject 
to the possibility of failure. Star points out how the normally invisible quality 
of infrastructures becomes visible when they collapse (1999, 382). We are, for 
example, much more likely to notice our dependence on the electricity grid 
during a power cut than when everything is working as normal. The same 
could be said of systems that connect individuals, allow them to connect to 
the broadband Internet, convert purely digital addresses into addresses more 
intelligible for the human brain, or shape the blockchain.
As manifestations of failure, however, the material and process failures 
that underlie socio- technical systems are not only relevant in the instability 
that unmasks them. On the contrary, they are always important. Boundar -
ies contributing to “infrastructure inequality” (Nelms 2016, 511) can help 
bring forward broader issues of access and can problematize information 
that can be standardized and operationalized and that which cannot. In 
a nutshell, it is by analyzing the politics of technological infrastructures 
and basing them in their materiality that we avoid implicitly and explicitly 
fetishizing the novelty of new technologies and develop a more nuanced 
perspective to understand what ultimately constitutes questionable— and, 
indeed, contentious— models of continuity and change.
If there is but one insight about Internet governance research to take 
away from this chapter, it is that, when examined through the STS lens, the 
Internet is not a given, static technological entity in need of regulation; it is 
the ensemble of technological elements of the network of networks and the 
different actors doing things with it that constitute, perpetuate, and contest 
sociopolitical order. In addition to the technical decisions about the design 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 202598 F. Musiani
and operation of the network, formal law and regulation, and the forces of 
the market, a number of rather mundane and taken- for- granted activities, 
driven by heterogeneous and often competing visions or based on inher -
ently social and political arrangements of trust and consensus, contribute 
to Internet governance as it is today.
Conclusion
As the Internet more and more becomes humanity’s primary global facility, 
marketplace, and public sphere, sociopolitical and socio- technical contro -
versies become an increasingly important part of what lies under the Inter -
net governance label. The STS toolbox provides one of the most interesting 
opportunities for them to be thoroughly accounted for, richly described, 
and extensively analyzed, with notions that are both concepts  (they suggest 
a vision of how the world goes, what drives its operations, and what makes 
them meaningful in political terms) and methods  (each of these notions is 
also a practical way to apprehend the inner workings of Internet governance 
on the field). In this sense, recent research seeking to merge STS and Internet 
governance is indeed a blueprint for a controversy- based and infrastructure-  
based understanding of the backstage of today’s Internet politics.
STS methods come, of course, with their own set of challenges. Looking at 
the mundane, the “shaping invisible” (Musiani 2018), which usually escapes 
the public radar— often even the scholarly radar— implies identifying the right 
terrain, singling out the ways to get to it, and finally patiently negotiating 
access to it (see Jørgensen’s chapter 8), because an in- depth ethnographic work 
is a necessary precondition to a meaningful STS endeavor. This negotiation is, 
sometimes, not with potential fieldwork actors but with the researcher’s own 
set of competences: to analyze and, more, to clearly analytically describe  envi -
ronments requires a high level of technicality that first needs to be mastered 
by the researcher. Thus, STS researchers of Internet governance (as is the case 
for many scholars of the governance of other technical systems and devices) 
often have composite disciplinary backgrounds, having arrived to STS meth -
ods only after previous training in computer science and engineering.
The choice of which fieldwork to address in depth— usually one or a few 
case studies— brings with it questions of criteria selection for that choice and 
of the representativeness of the selected cases. And finally, closely related to 
the previous point— despite the difficulty of generalizing to broader principles, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  99
which is intrinsic to the STS approach— for their work to be meaningful in 
a broader dialogue with other disciplines, STS- inspired Internet governance 
researchers should guard against falling into a common trap of their discipline 
of disciplines: making the language of complexity and heterogeneity the main 
protagonist of their analyses to the point of clouding conclusions behind it.
The increasing attention dedicated by STS scholars to the Internet gov -
ernance field has not, of course, grown in isolation. In addition to the lin -
eage of Internet studies introduced earlier in the chapter, a significant body 
of existing STS literature provides insights into distributed participation in 
techno- scientific controversies, and Internet governance research can learn 
from governance of and by science and technology in other contemporary, 
complex socio- technical domains such as environment, health, nanotech -
nologies, and genetic engineering (see, e.g., Irwin 2006). Similarly, Internet 
governance research in other, more historical disciplines, mainly focused 
on the institutional level and the role of the state— political science, law, 
history, international relations, and institutional economics— can speak to 
STS and help, for example, mitigate some of the undesired consequences of 
STS approaches described earlier.
The nexus between STS- inspired Internet governance studies and other 
bodies of STS on infrastructures and socio- technical controversies is likely 
to become even more inextricably entangled as the reach of Internet 
infrastructure actors extends to other types of infrastructures. Larry Page 
once predicted that “Google would be building airports and cities,” and 
the Internet giants are readying to extend themselves: while it has long 
been believed that the influence of digital actors would remain confined 
to software, dematerialized content, and information, it starts to be clear 
that they are using their mastery in these areas to take positions in non -
digital markets, be it transport, infrastructure management, or banking. 
Google may not be building cities yet, but directly or through its invest -
ments it is already playing a role as a mobility organizer. IBM participates 
in the management of water supply infrastructure in several cities. With 
the connection of infrastructures and objects, the organization of physi -
cal flows requires the control of information flows. Massive data are at the 
heart of this movement, which calls into question the positions of the his -
torical players in these markets. Internet governance and its study in the 
near future should take into account these ongoing developments about 
the perimeter and the very nature of Internet infrastructure, just as, in the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025100 F. Musiani
recent past, they started to acknowledge the shift from governance of Inter -
net infrastructure to governance by infrastructure.
The STS focus on unpacking some of the mundane elements of the 
Internet— such as technical details and minutiae, invisible maintenance 
work, specific case studies, and close follow- ups of controversies— is a nec -
essary complement, not a substitute, to those efforts that seek to elaborate 
general principles and theories about the ways in which the distribution of 
power and resources, in short, the world of politics and governance, works.
Acknowledgments
This chapter summarizes and updates work first outlined in Musiani (2015), 
further developed in Musiani (2018), and conducted jointly with several 
colleagues (DeNardis and Musiani 2016; Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 
2016; Musiani and M éadel 2016; Musiani, Pelizza, and Milan 2016; Musiani 
and Schafer 2019). My heartfelt thanks to Laura DeNardis, Dmitry Epstein, 
Christian Katzenbach, C écile M éadel, Stefania Milan, Annalisa Pelizza, and 
Valérie Schafer, without whom this chapter would not exist.
During the writing of this chapter, I was supported by the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (H2020-  
ICT- 2015, ICT- 10– 2015) under grant agreement number 688722–  NEXTLEAP, 
and I am currently supported by the French National Agency for Research 
(ANR), under grant ANR- 17- CE26- 0020– ResisTIC.
Note
1. A debate is ongoing among STS Internet governance scholars on whether user 
agency and practice should be included in Internet governance, Laura DeNardis (2014) 
notably saying it should not be included. Interestingly, as Mueller and Badiei in chap -
ter 3 show, this uncertainty about whether certain user practices should or should 
not be included in Internet governance may account for its underrepresentation as 
a research topic in sociology and social sciences journals, because several sociologists 
are in fact studying issues relevant to Internet governance without labeling it as such.
References
Abbate, J. (2012). L’histoire de l’Internet au prisme des STS. Le temps des médias, 18 , 
170– 180.
Bernards, N., & Campbell- Verduyn, M. (2019). Understanding technological change 
in global finance through infrastructures: Introduction to Review of International 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  101
Political Economy Special Issue “The Changing Technological Infrastructures of 
Global Finance.” Review of International Political Economy, 26 (5), 773– 789. doi . org / 10  
. 1080 / 09692290 . 2019 . 1625420
Blanchette, J.- F. (2011). A material history of bits. Journal of the Association for Infor -
mation Science and Technology, 62 (6), 1042– 1057.
Bowker, G. C., Baker, K., Millerand, F., & Ribes, D.  (2010). Toward information 
infrastructure studies: Ways of knowing in a networked environment. In J. Hun -
singer, L. Klastrup, and M. Allen (Eds.), International Handbook of Internet Research  
(pp. 97– 117). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Braman, S. (2016). Instability and Internet design. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). 
doi:10.14763/2016.3.429
Brousseau, E., Marzouki, M., & M éadel, C. (Eds.). (2012). Governance, regulation and 
powers on the Internet . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Callon, M., Lascoumes, P., & Barthe, Y. (2009). Acting in an uncertain world: An essay 
on technical democracy . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cheniti, T. (2009a). Global Internet governance in practice: Mundane encounters and 
multiple enactments  (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Oxford, UK.
Cheniti, T. (2009b, March).  Internet governanc- ing . Paper presented at the Modes of 
Governance in Digitally Networked Environments Workshop, Oxford Internet Insti -
tute, Oxford, UK.
De Filippi, P., & Loveluck, B. (2016). The invisible politics of Bitcoin: Gover -
nance crisis of a decentralized infrastructure. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). doi:10.14  
763/2016.3.427
de Fornel, M. (1994). Le cadre interactionnel de l’ échange visiophonique. Réseaux, 
64, 107– 132.
Deibert, R. J., & Crete- Nishihata, M. (2012). Global governance and the spread of 
cyberspace controls. Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International 
Organizations, 18 (3), 339– 361.
DeNardis, L. (2009). Protocol politics: The globalization of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeNardis, L. (2012). Hidden levers of Internet control: An infrastructure- based 
theory of Internet governance. Journal of Information, Communication & Society, 
15(3), 1– 19.
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Hackl, A. M. (2015). Internet governance by social media platforms. 
Telecommunications Policy, 39 (9), 761– 770. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2015.04.003
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025102 F. Musiani
DeNardis, L., & Musiani, F. (2016). Introduction: Governance by infrastructure. In F. 
Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The turn to infrastruc -
ture in Internet governance  (pp. 3– 21). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Neuman, W. R., & Robinson, J. P. (2001). Social implica -
tions of the Internet. Annual Review of Sociology, 27 (1), 307– 336.
Elkin- Koren, N. (2012). Governing access to user- generated content: The changing 
nature of private ordering in digital networks. In E. Brousseau, M. Marzouki, 
C. M éadel (Eds.), Governance, regulations and powers on the Internet  (pp. 318– 343). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Epstein, D. (2013). The making of institutions of information governance: The case 
of the Internet Governance Forum. Journal of Information Technology, 28 (2), 137– 149.
Epstein, D., Katzenbach, C., & Musiani, F. (2016). Doing Internet governance: 
Practices, controversies, infrastructures, and institutions. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). 
doi:10.14763/2016.3.435
Ermoshina, K. (2016). Au code, citoyens: Mise en technologie de problèmes publics  
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). MINES ParisTech.
Flanagan, M., Howe, D. C., & Nissenbaum, H. (2008). Embodying values in  technology: 
Theory and practice. In J. van den Hoven & J. Weckert (Eds.), Information technology and 
moral philosophy  (pp. 322– 353). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Flyverbom, M. (2011). The power of networks: Organizing the global politics of the Inter -
net. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Flyverbom, M. (2016). Disclosing and concealing: Internet governance, information con -
trol and the management of visibility. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). doi:10.14763/2016.3.428
Fuller, M. (Ed.). (2008). Software studies: A lexicon . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gillespie, T., Boczkowski, P., & Foot, K. (Eds.). 2014). Media technologies: Essays on 
communication, materiality and society . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hofmann, J., Katzenbach, C., & Gollatz, K. (2016). Between coordination and regulation: 
Finding the governance in Internet governance. New Media & Society, 19 (9), 1406– 1423.
Irwin, A. (2006). The politics of talk: Coming to terms with the “new” scientific 
governance. Social Studies of Science, 36 (2): 299– 320.
Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor- network: Ordering, strategy, and 
heterogeneity. Systems Practice, 5 (4), 379– 393.
Mager, A. (2012). Algorithmic ideology: How capitalist society shapes search engines. 
Information, Communication & Society, 15 (5), 769– 787.
Malcic, S. (2016). The problem of future users: How constructing the DNS shaped 
Internet governance. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). doi:10.14763/2016.3.434
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Science and Technology Studies Approaches to Internet Governance  103
Malcolm, J. (2008). Multi- stakeholder governance and the Internet Governance Forum . 
Wembley, Australia: Terminus Press.
Marino, M. C. (2006). Critical code studies. Electronic Book Review . Retrieved from 
http:// www . electronicbookreview . com / thread / electropoetics / codology
Marsden, C. T. (2017). Network neutrality: From policy to law to regulation . Manchester, 
UK: Manchester University Press.
Meier- Hahn, U. (2015, February 5). Internet interconnection: Networking in uncer -
tain terrain [Blog post]. RIPE Labs . Retrieved from https:// labs . ripe . net / Members  
/ uta_meier_hahn / internet - interconnection - networking - in - uncertain - terrain
Merrill, K. (2016). Domains of control: Governance of and by the domain name 
system. In F. Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The turn to 
infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 89– 106). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Milan, S., & ten Oever, N. (2017). Coding and encoding rights in Internet infrastruc -
ture. Internet Policy Review, 6 (1). doi:10.14763/2017.1.442
Mueller, M. L., Kuehn, A., & Santoso, S. M. (2012). Policing the network: Using DPI 
for copyright enforcement. Surveillance & Society, 9 (4), 348– 364.
Musiani, F. (2012). Caring about the plumbing: On the importance of architectures 
in social studies of (peer- to- peer) technology. Journal of Peer Production, 1 . Retrieved 
from http:// peerproduction . net / issues / issue - 1 / peer - reviewed - papers / caring - about - the  
- plumbing /
Musiani, F. (2015). Practice, plurality, performativity and plumbing: Internet gover -
nance research meets science and technology studies. Science, Technology and Human 
Values, 40 (2): 272– 286.
Musiani, F. (2018). L’invisible qui fa çonne. Etudes d’infrastructure et gouvernance 
d’Internet. Tracés, 35 , 161– 176.
Musiani, F., Cogburn, D. L., DeNardis, L., & Levinson, N. S. (Eds.). (2016). The turn to 
infrastructure in Internet governance . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Musiani, F., Mallard, A., & M éadel, C. (2018). Governing what wasn’t meant to be 
governed: A controversy- based approach to the study of governance in Bitcoin. In M. 
Campbell- Verduyn (Ed.), Bitcoin and beyond  (pp. 133– 156). London, UK: Routledge.
Musiani, F., & M éadel, C. (2016). “Reclaiming the Internet” with distributed archi -
tectures: An introduction. First Monday, 21 (12). Retrieved from http:// firstmonday  
. org / ojs / index . php / fm / article / view / 7101
Musiani, F., Pelizza, A., & Milan, S. (2016). Materializing Governance by Infrastructure. 
4S Preview Blog . Retrieved from http:// www . 4sonline . org / blog / post / mater ializing_gov  
ernance_by_infrastructure
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025104 F. Musiani
Musiani, F., & Schafer, V. (2019). Science and technology studies approaches to 
web history. In N. Br ügger & I. Milligan (Eds.), Handbook of Web History  (pp. 73– 85). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nelms, T. C. (2016). Alt. economy: Strategies, tensions, challenges. Journal of Cultural 
Economy, 9 (5), 507– 512.
Pelizza, A. (2016). Developing the vectorial glance: Infrastructural inversion for the new 
agenda on governmental information systems. Science, Technology and Human Values, 
41(2), 298– 321.
Pinch, T., & Leuenberger, C. (2006). Studying scientific controversy from the STS perspective . 
Paper presented at the Science Controversy and Democracy Conference, Taipei, Taiwan.
Pohle, J. (2016). Multistakeholder governance processes as production sites: Enhanced 
cooperation “in the making.” Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). doi:10.14763/2016.3.432
Proulx, S. (2009, June). L’intelligence du grand nombre: la puissance d’agir des con -
tributeurs sur Internet— limites et possibilit és. 7ème colloque du chapitre français de 
l’ISKO, Intelligence collective et organisation des connaissances , Lyon, France. http:// pro  
. ovh . net / ~iskofran / pdf / isko2009 / PROULX . pdf
Sargsyan, T. (2016). The privacy role of information intermediaries through self-  
regulation. Internet Policy Review, 5 (4). doi:10.14763/2016.4.438
Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43 (3), 
377– 391.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. (1989). Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary 
objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 
1907– 39. Social Studies of Science, 19 (3), 387– 420.
Star, S. L., & Ruhleder, K. (1994). Steps towards an ecology of infrastructure: Complex 
problems in design and access for large- scale collaborative systems. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work  (pp. 253– 264). Chapel Hill, NC: 
ACM Press.
Trompette, P., & Vinck, D. (Eds.). (2009). Retour sur la notion d’objet- fronti ère. 
Revue d’anthropologie des connaissances, 3 (1), 5– 27.
Woolgar, S., & Neyland, D. (2013). Mundane governance: Ontology and accountability . 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Ziewitz, M. (2016). Governing algorithms: Myth, mess, and methods. Science, Tech -
nology and Human Values, 41 (1), 3– 16.
Ziewitz, M., and Pentzold, C. (2010, October). Modes of Governance in Digitally Net -
worked Environments: A Workshop Report  (Discussion Paper No. 19). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford Internet Institute Forum.
Ziewitz, M., and Pentzold, C. (2014). In search of Internet governance: Performing 
order in digitally networked environments. New Media & Society, 16 (2), 306– 322.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Law as a Flexible System
In the field of Internet governance, the fast- changing technological and 
political environment challenges the suitability of traditional regulatory 
regimes; this assessment is justified even if the emphatic pronouncements 
in John Perry Barlow’s (1996) Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace  
have turned out to be not realistic. The dichotomy between the global 
reach of the infrastructure and the national embedment of the normative 
framework occasions the need for new legal research concepts and meth -
ods. Issues such as legitimacy, regulatory quality, technical standardization, 
and accountability are to be addressed (Weber 2016a). As I show in this 
chapter, legal scholars need to tackle these challenges.
Traditionally, the legal order was based on a communal, later on a national, 
normative framework that was complemented by self- regulatory instruments 
and, since the 19th century, partly by multilateral agreements. This regulatory 
framework, developed for the real world, is exposed to limitations if applied 
to the online world designed by the new information technologies. Therefore, 
the traditional understanding of political structures as command by a specific 
body that induces people to execute certain actions— in the sense that people 
think about what to choose and what to do— should be replaced in the Inter -
net governance context by a more inclusive approach. Before discussing the 
details of such an approach, I outline some basic principles of legal theory and 
the relevant guiding regulatory strategies for Internet governance.
Structural and Open System
In legal theory, law is seen as a structural system being composed of an orga -
nized or connected group of objects (terms, units, or categories) forming a 5 A Legal Lens into Internet Governance
Rolf H. Weber
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025106 R. H. Weber
complex unity. Legal norms are usually expressed in a linguistic form and 
are designed to give guidance about the desired behavior (Weber 2002, 32). 
The addressees, be it the whole society or a concerned part thereof, are sup -
posed to take note of the contents of law. Thereby, legal concepts help sup -
port adequate normative reasoning and stabilize normative expectations 
(Mahler 2014, 27– 33; Weber 2014b, 33).
The functions of law crystallize in a system of rules and institutions that 
underpin civil society, facilitate orderly interaction, and resolve conflicts and 
disputes arising in spite of the rules (Chik 2010). The creation of law can 
happen by way of different processes— for example, negotiations among the 
concerned norm addressees (a “social contract,” following the concept of 
Rousseau), imposition of legal rules by the governing body, or evolution in 
self- regulatory mechanisms (Weber 2014b, 33– 34; see also Amstutz 2011, 395).
The legal system is not a predetermined construct— that is, the legal sys -
tem is embedded in other socially relevant systems. Moreover, exchange 
and interchange between different social systems make the legal order 
porous. The open system approach is mainly influenced by the advances 
in cybernetics and information theory. In principle, the complexity of any 
system depends on the inclusion of other organized systems.1 Since mod -
ern societies are differentiated into a plurality of subsystems, a framework 
of sociological “functionalism” must be developed (Weber 2014b, 47).
A “meaningful law” in an open system is composed of norms that are 
perceived as legally binding, thereby inducing the addressees to acknowl -
edge the authority of the rulemaking body and to comply with the rules 
(Reed 2012, 70– 73, 105, 106). As a result, law should be able to regulate 
behavior and to allow people in a community to determine the limits of 
what can and cannot be done in their collective interests (Weber 2014b, 34; 
see also Mahler 2019,  72– 94; and Sandra Braman’s chapter 2).
Relative Autonomy and Flexibility of Law
In view of the rapid technological developments that cause social changes, 
it is imperative to realize a flexible legal framework in an open society. 
This flexibility presupposes that the legal rules profit from a certain degree 
of legal autonomy notwithstanding the linkages between different subsys -
tems in society.
The open society approach requires an assessment of the interdepen -
dence between normative concepts and other social sciences’ perspectives. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  107
In this context, legal theory scholars have defined criteria for the relative 
autonomy of law (see Post 1991, vii– viii): (1) “Autonomy” means that the 
law is not equal to and not fully dependent on other social sciences; (2) the 
word “relative” evidences that exchanges between the law and other social 
spheres take place in both directions (Weber 2002, 36– 37).
The theoretical foundation of relative autonomy shows that other 
social sciences are not in a position to rule out any legal flexibility being of 
importance because law needs to be able to react to changing circumstances 
(Weber 2014b, 49– 50). Nevertheless, the autonomy model does not directly 
find a clear distinction between law and no law. Generally, however, law 
may draw on insights from some other fields of discourse while retaining 
its separate entity.
Substance and Change of Law
Legal rules usually contain information having a guiding or even coercive 
effect on the members of civil society. The legal framework is composed of 
different instruments (for a general overview, see Weber 2002, 56):
• Multilateral or bilateral agreements binding the ratifying countries 
within the scope of the agreed regulations
• Fundamental norms stating substantial values and policies governing the 
life of the citizens and organizations in a country (usually the constitution)
• General rules applying to individuals and organizations in the form of a 
law or ordinance
• Specific decisions ruling on certain aspects of a legal relation
To avoid a legal system becoming rigid, mechanisms must be introduced 
that allow a change of the law according to social needs and circumstances. 
Notwithstanding that the predictability of the law requires a stable struc -
ture, the adaptability of legal rules, resilient to change, keeps the law intact 
in case of a relevant social change.2
However, before adapting existing laws, lawmakers should consider that 
legal changes are economically not without cost and do have a social impact: 
Laws are not created in a vacuum. New legal rules can be risky and costly. 
Addressees of legal rules may have a limited capacity for attention. New legal 
rules impose learning costs on the legal profession (see Weber 2002, 39).
The development of appropriate guidelines for potential changes of 
law is particularly important in the Internet field since the technological 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025108 R. H. Weber
environment is fast evolving and the global reach of the infrastructure is 
inherent.
Regulatory Strategies
Regulatory strategies cannot be implemented without regard to the politi -
cal landscape that is in the process of being established in the Internet 
governance field.
Political Visions of Rulemaking
Looking at the experience of the last few years, it seems obvious that the 
identification of the relevant political structures and their shortcomings 
as well as the assessment of the international legal order’s potential merit 
greater attention (see Rioux 2013, 37, 49– 54, for an overview of the constel -
lations of regulatory instruments in global governance). The appropriate -
ness of the legal framework encompassing Internet governance depends on 
the ability of the policy makers to embrace new approaches using different 
normative tools. Therefore, the implementation of legal instruments must 
be done with great care and prudence to avoid undesired effects (Weber 
2014b, 102).
Two visions of political power can be distinguished: the dominance of the 
state power as founded on the sovereignty concept and the power distribu -
tion relying on various stakeholders (Klimburg 2013). The two competing 
models have an impact not only on the international rulemaking agenda 
but also on the design of supranational institutions and the role of sover -
eign states. Therefore, the decision for one of the two models influences the 
decision- making processes and, indirectly, the outcome of deliberations. 
An example can be seen in the different approaches pursued at the World 
Conference on International Telecommunications in Dubai in December 
2012, organized by the International Telecommunication Union, and at 
the plenary conferences of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN) (see Weber 2013, 95, 98, 101).
The current challenges in Internet governance regulation by nature 
require a broader and more collective decision- making than in a nation-  
state. In times of globalization, the movement toward global governance is 
unavoidable and the structure of international law will need some adapta -
tions. The crucial point concerns the appropriate balance of power between 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  109
sovereign states, nonstate actors such as businesses and individuals, and 
new geographic or functional entities in a power- sharing framework 
(DeNardis 2014, 23).
As a result, global governance must enshrine collective efforts enabling 
the concerned persons to identify, understand, and address the global 
problems that go beyond the capacity of individual states to solve. Political 
theory may operate at different levels: A global framework needs to be com -
bined with domestic political theory in order to assess the necessary inter -
play of the different levels. A global political theory must be able to provide 
guidance as to what principles should be adopted and which principles 
should be implemented in reality. Rules are needed that help determine 
how general principles can be applied to specific issues (Weber 2014b, 105).
Quality of Regulation
An important aspect of Internet governance debates and its normative 
framework concerns the quality of regulation. Several criteria can improve 
the desired quality of regulation; the following questions should be taken 
into account (see Baldwin, Cave, and Lodge 2012, 27– 33):
• Is the regulatory action supported by legislative authority?
• Does the regime implement an appropriate scheme of accountability?
• Are procedures fair, accessible, and open?
• Is the regulator acting with sufficient expertise?
• Can the regulatory regime be assessed as an efficient system?
In an attempt to improve regulatory quality, the Organization for Eco -
nomic Cooperation and Development issued Guiding Principles for Regula -
tory Quality and Performance  (2005), which encompasses an extended scope 
of relevant aspects that reflect the social and environmental developments:
• Adoption of broad programs of regulatory reform that establish key 
objectives and frameworks for implementation at the political level
• Systematic assessment of impacts and review of regulations to ensure 
that the intended objectives are efficiently and effectively reached in a 
changing and complex economic and social environment
• Assurance that regulations, regulatory institutions charged with their 
implementation, and regulatory processes are transparent and nondis-
criminatory
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025110 R. H. Weber
• Elimination of unnecessary regulatory barriers to trade and investment 
through continued liberalization and enhancement of market openness 
throughout the regulatory processes
• Identification of important linkages with other policy objectives and 
development of policies to achieve a harmonized regime
In Internet governance, the appropriateness of these elements remains 
unchanged, but the approach needs to be widened.
Informal Rulemaking and New Regulatory Models
Experience has shown that the traditional legal instruments can hardly cope 
with the challenges of Internet governance. Therefore, rulemaking through 
informal social relations based on the human evolution from individuals 
into members of society must gain importance. The establishment of social 
structures has already been a line of thought, expressed by the philosophers 
of the 17th century (Thomas Hobbes, Jean- Jacques Rousseau). On the basis 
of the understanding of civil society, normative expectation encompassing 
substantive legal principles can evolve over time (Weber 2016a, 195, 201).
The discussions about Internet governance over the last 12 years have led 
to a dynamic regulatory matrix, or a hypercomplex structural match (Jør -
gensen 2013, 22– 24). Such kinds of complex structures have been described 
as polycentric regulation involving different communities in the rulemak -
ing processes (Murray 2007, 47, 234– 235). If the participants in a polycen -
tric regulation scheme have a shared set of normative beliefs, notions of 
validity of the rules and common policies grow; therefore, digitization is in 
a position for improving connections and facilitating the exchange of com -
munications. However, the polycentric regulation concept’s weakness con -
sists in the practical problems of rulemaking pluralism and fragmentation. 
The Internet is in need of a (at least partially) coordinated set of rules; dis -
cretionary pluralism would destroy its value since incompatible legal rules 
could have a negative impact on its global reach (Weber 2016a, 202– 203; 
for a general discussion of polycentric regulation, see Senn 2011, 31, 170).
Another theory is the concept of the so- called hybrid regulation; the 
term “hybrid” can be described as a combination of a contradictory dif -
ference, marked not by either- or but by both- and (Weitzenboeck 2014, 
49, 62). A similar approach is the so- called mesh theory, which is based 
on the acknowledgment that a paradigm shift occurs with the profound 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  111
transformation from a pyramid model of the government at the top to a 
network model (Ost and Van de Kerchove 2002, 14). Following this con -
ceptual approach, a “network communitarianism” can evolve as a process 
of discourse and dialogue between the individual and the society (Mur -
ray 2007, 68). However, the regulatory legitimacy of these concepts can be 
challenged because substantial discretion for the assessment of the rule -
making’s quality is left open (see Weber 2016a, 203– 204).
Another approach conceptualizing a world of hybrid legal spaces is the 
theory of global legal pluralism; this concept intends to encompass more 
than one legal or quasi- legal regime in the same field (Berman 2007, 1155–  
1158). The most recent theoretical approach to overcome the problems of 
previous regulatory concepts pleads for “global experimentalist governance,” 
an institutionalized transnational process of participatory and multilevel 
problem- solving that frames critical issues in an open- ended way by subject -
ing them to periodic revisions (de B úrca, Keohane, and Sabel 2014, 477).
Notwithstanding several merits of the newest regulatory concepts, 
even an ideal model does not address important substantive principles in 
Internet governance— for example, legitimacy and multistakeholderism—  
therefore, these two issues are discussed in more detail in the following.
Legitimacy of the Internet Governance Legal Framework
Notion and Scope
The word “legitimacy” can be traced back to the Latin word “legitimus” as 
meaning “lawful, according to law.” Legitimacy reflects an authority’s right 
to rule and embraces the justification of ruling power giving the governed 
the feeling that their own values are represented in a decision- making con -
text (Weber 2014b, 102– 103).
Legitimacy in a wider sense can also encompass an ethical- philosophical 
dimension that puts legitimacy above positive law. A distinction is made 
between normative legitimacy theories, setting out general criteria for evalu -
ating the right to rule, and empirical legitimacy theories, focusing on belief 
systems of those subject to government. As a result, legitimacy can be justified 
either by formal ideas as the rule of law rationale (legality) or by substantive 
value rationality based on morality and justice (see also Clark 2005, 18– 19).
According to J ürgen Habermas (1992), a source- oriented perception 
qualifies an authority as legitimate if it refers to the demos, the public. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025112 R. H. Weber
Procedural steps (or adequate procedures, in the terminology of Niklas 
Luhmann [1975]) within the different governing entities may enhance the 
legitimacy of policy- making decisions (see Weber 2009, 109, for a detailed 
analysis of the legitimacy of policy making from a theoretical perspective). 
Legitimacy also describes the relevant elements of governance that validate 
institutional decisions emanating from a right process.
Normative Principle
Legitimacy must be designed in line with constitutional values and prin -
ciples. As architectural pillars, three concepts can be put in place: “legal, 
morality, and constitutionality,” which are able to “mark out the terrain 
within which the practice of legitimacy tends to take place” (Clark 2005, 
18). Legitimacy plays, then, the role of a reconciling norm, enabling con -
sensus on how the three pillars are to be accommodated among each other 
(Clark 2005, 19; for the rule of law, see also Braman’s chapter 2).
The assessment of legitimacy can also be done from the perspective 
of regulatory purposes and standards, regulatory instruments, regulatory 
effectiveness, and regulatory connection. These perspectives are gaining 
importance because legitimacy questions are becoming weightier not only 
for the international society in general but also for the stability of the inter -
national order (Weber 2014b, 113).
As mentioned, procedural elements are crucial for the acknowledgment 
of a right process. However, procedure must be complemented by a sub -
stantive conception that looks at the outcome of the legitimizing proce -
dures (a result- oriented type of legitimacy). Such an approach depends on 
the values deemed as right by the stakeholders concerned, thus in part jus -
tifying them as legitimizing procedures. To avoid subjective perceptions of 
legitimate values prevailing, Habermas tried to link the procedural aspects 
with specific notions of contents. This “discourse principle” assumes that 
those norms can claim validity that receive the approval of all potentially 
affected persons, insofar as they participate in a free and rational discourse 
(Habermas 1992, 161).
Concretization for Internet Governance
In Internet governance, the implementation of appropriate organizational 
rules in the concerned social communities is a necessity. The actual pro -
cess can choose between different avenues. On the one hand, moral norms 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  113
falling under the notion of netiquette are relevant for online macrocom -
munities. On the other hand, the administration of the Internet, seen as a 
microcommunity, needs some basics of taxonomy (Weber 2014b, 112; for 
the history of the Internet, see Mueller and Badiei’s chapter 3).
ICANN as the main organization in Internet governance is a private 
organization. However, over time its legitimacy increased, partly due to the 
less strong ties with the government of the United States, partly due to the 
increased participation by other stakeholders over the last years. Further 
improvements of legitimacy are obviously possible, particularly regarding 
legal remedies (for example, an independent mediation and arbitration sys -
tem); in general, however, the acknowledgment of legitimacy by ICANN 
officials is on the right track.
From a theoretical perspective, the original self- regulatory mechanisms 
addressing legitimacy issues have moved to a more democratic and equally 
harder normative framework. Thus, the legal impact on governance ele -
ments has become stronger, and some quality criteria of regulation are ful -
filled to a wider extent.
Multistakeholderism in Internet Governance
Notion and Fundamentals
Before the second World Summit on the Information Society in late 2005, 
the Working Group on Internet Governance (2005) introduced a widely 
accepted working definition of multistakeholderism. This definition refers 
to the “development and application by Governments, the private sec -
tor and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, 
rules, decision- making procedures, and programmes that shape the evolu -
tion and use of the Internet.” Therefore, the interests of the stakeholders 
involved should be designed by participatory mechanisms reflecting the 
whole society’s view. Multistakeholderism is not a completely new phe -
nomenon evoked in the context of Internet governance; earlier develop -
ments concerned labor and sustainability fields (Weber 2016b, 247– 249; see 
also DeNardis’s chapter 1 and Hofmann’s chapter 12).
Four fundamental questions are at stake: How do governance groups 
best match challenges with the organizations, experts, and networks? How 
can governing bodies and entities be most able to help develop legitimate, 
effective, and efficient solutions? How should the flow of information and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025114 R. H. Weber
knowledge necessary for a successful governance be structured? How can 
different governance groups approach coordination between geographi -
cally different governance networks to avoid conflicting interests? (see 
ICANN/WEF Panel on Global Internet Cooperation and Governance Mech -
anisms 2014).
Practical considerations lead to the following additional questions: How 
can greater transparency and dialogue between different civil society groups 
and standards experts be introduced? How can standards be developed rap -
idly with the scrutiny of the increasing multistakeholder arrangements? 
(Brown and Marsden 2013, 200).
Basic values of multistakeholder models are openness (access to discus -
sions, negotiations, and decisions), transparency (clear formal and substantive 
regimes with appropriate representation), accessibility (for information sources 
and procedures), accountability (responsibility of decision makers), credibility 
(general acceptance of decision makers), and consensus- orientation (accept -
ability of decisions taken) (Weber 2016b, 251). These basic values should be 
the foundation for appropriate legitimacy strategies, but the schemes must be 
broad enough and leave room for adaptations in a given context.
Forms and Legal Framework of Decision- Making
The concept of multistakeholderism requires at least two classes of stake -
holders (Raymond and DeNardis 2015, 572, 575). Different concepts of mul -
tistakeholderism can be and are implemented in reality, subject to the types 
of actors that are involved and the nature of authority relations between 
these actors.
Depending on the design of the actors and the scope of relations, the 
combinations in a matrix can be numerous (Raymond and DeNardis 2015, 
577, 583). Furthermore, multistakeholder arrangements usually also vary 
by level. Four ideal- typical structural models have been developed: hierar -
chy (for example, the case of the International Telecommunication Union), 
homogeneous polyarchy (for example, the Internet Engineering Task Force, 
W3C, and International Organization of Securities Commissions), hetero -
geneous polyarchy (for example, ICANN, the UN Global Compact), and 
anarchy (ibid., 580, 603). Often, the choice of the models is limited, but 
some discretion for the involved stakeholders is mostly given.
In general, a multistakeholder decision- making framework should 
encompass the following main elements:
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  115
• Identification of the most adequate set of stakeholders participating in 
a particular issue
• Definition of the criteria and mechanisms for the selection of represen -
tatives from different groups
• Avoidance of capture of multistakeholder processes by corporate power 
or influential nongovernmental organization
• Implementation of crowdsourcing techniques bringing inputs into dia -
logue on difficult topics
• Establishment of technologies helping the representatives liaise with 
their constituencies and monitor reached agreements
• Creation of a technological framework facilitating dialogue to reach a 
minimum consensus in a multistakeholder body
• Methods for accelerating the decision- making processes in multistake -
holder bodies
• Theoretical models supporting consensus building and decision- making 
in multistakeholder environments (Almeida, Getschko, and Afonso 2015, 
74, 78)
In designing the multistakeholder decision- making framework, politi -
cal context and cultural factors must be taken into account (Weber 2016b, 
250). The implementation should also consider the effect of existing stan -
dards on the decision- making of an organization and whether to lower 
potential entry barriers for stakeholders (see also Van Huijstee 2012, 45).
Concretization for Internet Governance
Practical experiences have shown over the last few years that a range of 
approaches, mechanisms, and tools are available for the realization of multi -
stakeholder objectives, leading to the acknowledgment that a toolbox should 
be developed with a number of suitable instruments (Gasser, Budish, and 
West 2015, 2; see also Buzatu 2015, 11– 14). This assessment is not surprising 
since multistakeholder models must rely on an ever- increasing participation 
by those with interests, capacities, and needs (Doria 2013, 115, 135). There -
fore, the multistakeholder concept may not be seen as a value in itself to be 
applied homogeneously to governance functions— that is, it is not a one- size- 
fits- all solution (Weber 2016b, 258). However, the development of systems 
for sharing information, taking decisions, designing checks and balances, and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025116 R. H. Weber
implementing assurance models is at the heart of effective multistakeholder 
initiatives (Buzatu 2015, 16).
Multistakeholderism is practiced in reality in, for example, the context 
of the Internet Governance Forum, which includes a special committee, the 
Multistakeholder Advisory Group (MAG), whose roughly 40 seats represent 
the five world regions and also balance gender (Hofmann 2016, 16). The 
multistakeholder element, addressing participation in different ways and 
using different terms, also prominently appears in the NETmundial Multi -
stakeholder Statement released at the closure of the NETmundial Confer -
ence held in S ão Paulo in April 2014.3 Attendees from around the world, in 
government, the private sector, civil society, the technical community, and 
academia, crafted this nonbinding statement. In the meantime, ICANN 
also partly opened the door for some multistakeholder exchanges, mainly 
in connection with accountability.4
Without any doubt, the debates about Internet governance and multi -
stakeholderism must encompass the general and relevant policy issues, in 
particular legitimacy, transparency, and accountability; topics have been 
linked only in a limited way (Weber 2016b, 259– 262; see also Gasser, Bud -
ish, and West 2015, 10– 11, 22– 23, 26). In addition, topics such as decision-  
making procedures (Zingales and Radu 2017, 53, 67), formation and 
operation inclusiveness, and effectiveness need further attention (Weber 
2016b, 262– 264; see also Gasser, Budish, and West 2015, 11– 13, 18– 26).
In view of these manifold factors, no standard way to form multistake -
holder groups can be established. Depending on the cultural and the con -
tractual factors in shaping the functioning and the outcome of governance 
groups (for example, the preexisting relationships between the stakeholders, 
the relationship between the governance group and the governmental insti -
tution, the allocation of resources, and geopolitical factors), the dimensions 
of multistakeholder groups must be designed; therefore, a broad spectrum of 
purposes can be listed, ranging from open- ended missions to issue- specific 
tasks (Gasser, Budish, and West 2015, 10, 25; Weber 2016b, 258).
Even if multistakeholderism is not a value as such, it must be consid -
ered as a possible approach for meeting salient public interest objectives 
by determining what types of decision- making are optimal in the given 
functional and political context (Raymond and DeNardis 2015, 610). The 
following elements and action points support effective multistakeholder 
governance (Buzatu 2015, 28– 31; Weber 2016b, 265):
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  117
• Identification and articulation of purpose and objectives (appropriate 
setting of the stage)
• Identification of the players (adequate and precise definition of the 
stakeholders)
• Development of the applicable multistakeholder governance model
• Definition of the envisaged procedural formation and operation prin -
ciples and description of the scope of inclusiveness
• Determination of the appropriate level of transparency
• Implementation of accountability standards
• Provision of guidance for the implementation of the agreed standards
• Identification of a sustainable and credible funding model for the multi -
stakeholder processes
• Development of oversight and assurance mechanisms
In a nutshell, multistakeholder initiatives can be seen as fora multipliers 
through manifold platforms for dialogue. Furthermore, such initiatives are 
suitable to establish fora for evolving standards and governing mechanisms 
(on the human rights issue, refer to Braman’s chapter 2 and Jørgensen’s chap -
ter 8). But many factors in multistakeholder initiatives need further research; in 
particular a multidisciplinary examination of the relevant questions incorpo -
rating socio- legal, economic, policy- oriented, and game theory studies, as well 
as interdisciplinary information studies drawing on political analyses appears 
to be indispensable (Brown and Marsden 2013, 200– 201). Developing a multi -
disciplinary catalog of methodologies as well as the corresponding multidisci -
plinary tools can improve the chances for the existence of an appropriate tool 
kit as well as the comprehension of challenges of better participative decision-  
making and configuration of governance concepts (Weber 2016b, 265).
Conclusion
If a legal lens is applied to Internet governance, then the original quite soft 
law has become much harder. Normative principles gain importance, and 
quality criteria of regulation are more closely taken into account.
On the one hand, the legal framework has been strengthened concern -
ing the substantive Internet governance principles such as legitimacy, trans -
parency, and accountability. The described developments in the legislative 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025118 R. H. Weber
context show the awareness of the involved stakeholders in broadening the 
foundation for policy decisions. In addition, the more frequently chosen 
multistakeholder approach has been concretized, and its applicable elements 
are hammered out to achieve an appropriate regulatory environment.
On the other hand, sovereignty considerations have gained much higher 
attention in many countries— that is, national control of infrastructure 
becomes increasingly important. As a consequence, legal fragmentation 
causes obstacles that jeopardize cross- border data flows (see Braman’s chap -
ter 2; Mueller 2017; Voelsen 2019). The politically envisaged fragmentation 
contradicting the objective of legal interoperability (see Palfrey and Gasser 
2012; Weber 2014a) must mainly be seen as a power struggle over the future 
of national sovereignty in the digital world (Mueller 2017, 5).
These new movements increase the challenges for the legal profes -
sion. More interdisciplinary research is imperative, thereby widening the 
perspective for an overarching perception of Internet governance in all 
social sciences (for a good example, see Kerr, Musiani, and Pohle 2019). 
Following Rousseau’s social contract concept, a legal framework for Inter -
net governance must establish open communication channels leading to 
“commons of knowledge” (Weber 2016a, 214). As a consequence, policy 
makers are now confronted with cross- sectoral concerns simultaneously 
combining socioeconomic, political, and ethical dilemmas. The capacities 
of the current institutional patchwork to deliver on transborder challenges 
have become questionable, not at least because other issues such as climate 
change or international migration flows determine the political agendas 
(Radu 2019, 196). Therefore, advocates of Internet governance are called on 
to regain confidence in their willingness to uphold a normative framework 
that guarantees that rules for Internet use are designed in a way to be trust -
worthy in the eyes of civil society.
Notes
1. The most influential and ambitious attempt to describe an interchange paradigm 
goes back to Parsons (1991), who distinguishes four social subsystems: adaptation, goal 
attainment, integration, and pattern- maintenance/latent tension management (AGIL).
2. The relevance depends on the circumstances: fundamental principles (for exam -
ple, human rights) are less likely to be subject to substantive adaptation.
3. The statement is available at http:// netmundial . br / netmundial - multistakeholder  
- statement /   .
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  119
4. For an overview of the information given by ICANN on accountability, see 
https:// www . icann . org / resources . accountability  .
References
Almeida, V., Getschko, D., & Afonso, C. (2015). The origin and evolution of multi -
stakeholder models. IEEE Internet Computing, 19 (1), 74– 79.
Amstutz, M. (2011). Mechanisms of evolution for a law of the future. In S. Muller, 
S. Zouridis, M. Frishman, & L. Kistemaker (Eds.), The law of the future and the future 
of law  (pp. 395– 405). Oslo, Norway: TOAEP.
Baldwin, R., Cave, M., & Lodge, M. (2012). Understanding regulation: Theory, strategy, 
and practice , 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press on Demand.
Barlow, J. P. (1996). A declaration of the independence of cyberspace . Retrieved from 
https:// www . eff . org / cyberspace - independence
Berman, P. S. (2007). Global legal pluralism. Southern California Law Review, 80 ; 
Princeton Law and Public Affairs Working Paper No. 08– 001. Retrieved from https://  
ssrn . com / abstract =985340
Brown, I., & Marsden, C. T. (2013). Regulating code: Good governance and better regula -
tion in the information age . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Buzatu, A.- M. (2015). Multi- stakeholder approaches to governance: Challenges and oppor -
tunities . DCAR Horizon Working Paper 8.
Chik, W. B. (2010). “Customary Internet- ional law”: Creating a body of customary 
law for cyberspace. Part 1: Developing rules for transitioning custom into law. Com-
puter Law & Security Review, 26 (1), 3– 22.
Clark, I. (2005). Legitimacy in international society . Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
de Búrca, G., Keohane, R. O., & Sabel, C. (2014). Global experimentalist governance. 
British Journal of Political Science, 44 (3), 477– 486.
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
Doria, A. (2013). Use [and abuse] of multistakeholderism in the Internet. In R. Radu, 
J.- M. Chenou, & R. H. Weber (Eds.), The evolution of global Internet governance  (pp. 
115– 138). Zürich, Switzerland: Schulthess.
Gasser, U., Budish, R., & West, S. M. (2015). Multistakeholder as governance groups: 
Observations from case studies  (Series 1). Berkman Center for Internet & Society 
Research Publications. Retrieved from https:// papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm  
? abstract_id =2549270
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025120 R. H. Weber
Habermas, J. (1992). Faktizität und Geltung . Frankfurt, Germany:  Suhrkamp.
Hofmann, J. (2016). Multi- stakeholderism in Internet governance: Putting a fiction 
into practice. Journal of Cyber Policy, 1 (1): 29– 49.
ICANN/WEF Panel on Global Internet Cooperation and Governance Mechanisms. 
(2014). Panel Report: Towards a Collaborative, Decentralized Internet Governance Ecosystem . 
Retrieved from https:// www . icann . org / en / system / files / files / collaborative - decen tralized  
- ig - ecosystem - 21may14 - en . pdf
Jørgensen, R. F. (2013). Framing the net: The Internet and human rights . Cheltenham, 
UK: Edward Elgar.
Kerr, A., Musiani, F., & Pohle, J. (2019). Communication and Internet policy: A criti -
cal rights- based history and future. Internet Policy Review, 8 (1), 1– 16.
Klimburg, A. (2013). The Internet Yalta . Center for a New American Security. 
Retrieved from https:// s3 . amazonaws . com / files . cnas . org / documents / CNAS_WCIT_
commentary - corrected - 03 . 27 . 13 . pdf
Luhmann, N. (1975). Legitimation durch Verfahren , 2nd ed. Darmstadt/Neuwied, Ger -
many: Suhrkamp.
Mahler, T. (2014). A gTLD right? Conceptual challenges in the expanding Internet 
domain namespace. International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 22 (1), 27– 48.
Mahler, T. (2019). Generic top- level domains: A study of transnational private regulation . 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Mueller, M. (2017). Will the Internet fragment? Sovereignty, globalization and cyberspace . 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Murray, A. (2007). The regulation of cyberspace: Control in the online environment . 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge- Cavendish.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2005). Guiding prin -
ciples for regulatory quality and performance . Paris, France: Author.
Ost, F., & van de Kerchove, M. (2002). De la pyramide au réseau?: pour une théorie 
dialectique du droit . Brussels, Belgium: Presses de l’Universit é Saint- Louis.
Palfrey, J., & Gasser, U. (2012). Interop: The promise and perils of highly interconnected 
systems . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Parsons, T. (1991). The social system . New York, NY: Taylor and Francis.
Post, R. (1991). Introduction: The relatively autonomous discourse of law. In R. Post 
(Ed.), Law and the order of culture  (pp. vii– xvi). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Radu, R. (2019). Negotiating Internet governance . Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025A Legal Lens into Internet Governance  121
Raymond, M., & DeNardis, L. (2015). Multistakeholderism: Anatomy of an inchoate 
global institution. International Theory, 7 (3), 572– 616.
Reed, C. (2012). Making laws for cyberspace . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rioux, M. (2014). Competing institutional trajectories for global regulation: Internet 
in a fragmented world. In R. Radu, J.- M. Chenou, & R. H. Weber (Eds.). The evolution 
of global Internet governance  (pp. 37– 55). Zürich, Switzerland: Schulthess.
Senn, M. (2011). Non- state regulatory regimes: Understanding institutional transforma -
tion. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Science & Business Media.
van Huijstee, M. (2012). Multi- stakeholder initiatives: A strategic guide for civil soci -
ety organizations. Amsterdam, Netherlands, Working Paper. Retrieved from http://  
papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract_id =2117933
Voelsen, D. (2019). Risse im Fundament des Internets: die Zukunft der Netz-  
Infrastruktur und die globale Internet Governance. Berlin, Germany, Working 
Paper. Retrieved from https:// www . ssoar . info / ssoar / handle / document / 62982
Weber, R. H. (2002). Regulatory models for the online world . Zürich, Switzerland: Schulthess.
Weber, R. H. (2009). Shaping Internet governance: Regulatory challenges . Zürich, Swit -
zerland: Schulthess.
Weber, R. H. (2013). Visions of political power: Treaty making and multistakeholder 
understanding. In R. Radu, J.- M. Chenou, & R. H. Weber (Eds.), The evolution of global 
Internet governance  (pp. 95– 113). Zürich, Switzerland: Schulthess.
Weber, R. H. (2014a, December). Legal interoperability as a tool for combatting frag -
mentation (Paper Series No. 4). Waterloo, Canada: Global Commission for Internet 
Governance.
Weber, R. H. (2014b). Realizing a new global cyberspace framework . Zürich, Switzer -
land: Schulthess.
Weber, R. H. (2016a). Elements of a legal framework for cyberspace. Swiss Review of 
International and European Law, 26 (2), 195– 215.
Weber, R. H. (2016b). Legal foundations of multistakeholder decision- making. 
Zeitschrift für Schweizerisches Recht, 135 , 247– 263.
Weitzenboeck, E. M. (2014). Hybrid net: The regulatory framework of ICANN and 
the DNS. International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 22 (1), 49– 73.
Working Group on Internet Governance. (2005). Report of the working group on 
Internet governance. Retrieved from http:// www . wgig . org / docs / WGIGREPORT . pdf
Zingales, N., & Radu, R. (2017). In search for the holy grail: Meaningful multistakeholder 
governance in Internet policy- making. In C. Prins, C. Cuijpers, P. L. Lindseth, & M. 
Rosina (Eds.), Digital democracy in a globalized world . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The World Wide Web is the most significant application of the Internet, a 
simple, easy- to- use information space indexed by uniform resource identifi -
ers  on which are built most of the services accessed by Internet users today, 
including search engines, video streaming, and social media. Although the 
Internet predated the web by decades, the web brought a technical revolu -
tion, with the most significant social impact changing many aspects of how 
communication takes place and social behavior is shaped in politics, econom -
ics, leisure, entertainment, scientific research, commerce, and social interac -
tion. As noted by Mueller and Badiei in chapter 2, the creation of the web 
(together with the invention of the browser) was partly responsible for the 
emergence of the Internet as a mass public medium, which has made Internet 
governance such a key issue. It has evolved from an efficient, although not 
unique, document repository to an active socio- cognitive space in which peo -
ple express ideas and emotions across geopolitical boundaries. Its impact and 
reach have emphasized the importance of interpersonal integrity and issues of 
data ownership, privacy, trust, and surveillance in mainstream research, while 
the data, tools, and platforms that constitute and enable the web are distrib -
uted geographically, across legal jurisdictions. They are also used differently, 
with different levels of effectiveness and embeddedness, by diverse cultures, 
genders, age cohorts, and economic classes.
The social challenges of context of use and analysis make the task of 
studying the web complex. Neither are the technical challenges trivial, as 
the data that are generated may or may not be preserved. Rapid changes 
make it harder for researchers to find evidence to test hypotheses related to 
research questions pertinent to governance and policy making. For exam -
ple, consider the prominent roles played by private social networking enti -
ties in political campaigns run on the web (Stieglitz and Dang- Xuan 2013) 6 Web Observatories: Gathering Data for 
Internet Governance
Wendy Hall, Aastha Madaan, and Kieron O’Hara
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025124 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
or during disasters (Ngamassi, Ramakrishnan, and Rahman 2016) when 
these platforms play a critical role in providing physical aid and basic liv -
ing facilities to the stakeholders in consideration. In one specific example, 
Facebook has been implicated in the apparent violence directed at the state -
less Rohingya people in Myanmar (2016– 2018), as a means of orchestrating 
anti- Rohingya sentiment (Banyan 2017), as a means for jihadis to spread 
extremist messages (Singh and Haziq 2016; Stevens and O’Hara 2015), and 
as a means for the Rohingya to inform the world of their problems (Wong, 
Safi, and Rahman 2017). The effects of social networking may be found in 
more stable societies too— for instance, the rise of smartphone use among 
US teenagers correlates with (though may or may not have caused) a sud -
den rise in suicide rates over the same period by 31 percent for teenage boys 
and more than 100 percent for girls (Twenge et al. 2018).
In this chapter we argue that, while it is important to address various 
Internet governance issues at the protocol level (or design level), it is also 
critical to understand the affordances of Internet use for the interactions 
among stakeholders. For that, effective, ethical, and secure methods of 
gathering and sharing data will be required. In this chapter, we consider 
the challenges to creating and disseminating such methods and describe 
an architecture for that purpose, which we call the Web Observatory (Hall 
et al. 2013; Tiropanis et al. 2013). While the Web Observatory is situated in 
the web context, using web protocols to organize data, its value for Internet 
governance stems from the importance of the web as the gateway to the 
use of the Internet. The architecture is designed to meet a set of techni -
cal, social, and legal challenges that will stand in the way of any kind of 
evidence- based Internet governance. Additionally, although we don’t high -
light this in this chapter, the idea of a Web Observatory is intended also to 
provide a pragmatic means to facilitate the sharing of data; to this end, it 
has been argued that the Web Observatory is a potential architecture for a 
data trust  (O’Hara 2019), identified as a key enabler of the growth of the 
artificial intelligence industry (Hall and Pesenti 2017).
Governance, Content, and Data
The web is a socio- technical construct (Hall and Pesenti 2017), and as such 
its effects ripple through its embedding societies as emergent macro- level 
phenomena such as the formation of “crowds” as a response to real- world 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  125
events, the spread of emotional contagion, the site of opinion markets 
that affect the results of a real- world event such as an election, and the 
host of data marketplaces where data can be traded for monetary benefits 
while compromising personal privacy. It follows that, on top of the web’s 
technical development and its open standards, those with an interest in 
governance need also to consider content usage and access patterns to 
understand issues highlighted by DeNardis (2010)— digital equality (Har -
gittai 2010), social media (boyd 2008; DeNardis and Hackl 2015), identity 
(Turkle 2005), knowledge production (Benkler 2006), Web 2.0 critiques 
(Lanier 2010), and copyright and information intermediaries (Vaidhya -
nathan 2007). Data can provide deeper insights about large- scale popula -
tions in real time, opening out research questions about the social behavior 
germane to a user- centric view of Internet governance (Dutton and Peltu 
2005), on issues such as social and political movements; political partici -
pation and trust; crisis prevention, preparedness, response management, 
and recovery; individual, group or community, and national identities; and 
personal, local, national, and global security (De Roure 2014). To take one 
example, Wikipedia’s underlying technical platform remains more or less 
the same as it was in the beginning, but the way people interact through it 
has varied significantly over the years (Kittur et al. 2007), and so the regula -
tion of Wikipedia cannot simply be a matter of developing protocols.
A rich literature on Internet governance is available that describes vari -
ous perspectives, including governance of platforms, layers of Internet 
infrastructure and applications where governance needs to be separated, 
distributed governance based on geopolitical boundaries, and data gov -
ernance. Some of these also highlight how effective governance policies 
require working at a variety of scales, from the micro level of detail of indi -
vidual protocols like HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol)1 or HTML (hyper -
text markup language)2 to macro- level emergent behavior such as blogging, 
spamming, or e- commerce and how the social phenomena emerge onto, 
diverge within, and submerge into it.
For example, Google knows much more about us than we know about 
Google (Hall and Pesenti 2017). Even if we are not involved in any power 
play or asymmetrical encounter with Google, such asymmetry has rami -
fications. This has sparked debate about user privacy, unwanted profiling 
of customers (people) by technical giants, and tracking of their online 
activities, preferences, and location (Hildebrandt 2016; Zuboff 2019). These 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025126 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
mandate governance policies to be inclusive of these new forms of interac -
tions and relationships on the web.
Because of these social and political imperatives, a shift in the tradi -
tional Internet governance view has been proposed in the Tunis Agenda, 
successor the UN Working Group on Internet Governance,  and elsewhere 
(Wagner 2016). Whereas the traditional view of governance focused more 
on the technical functions and standards required to keep the Internet 
open, unfragmented, stable, resilient, and secure, the UN group advocates 
“the development and application by governments, the private sector and 
civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules, 
decision- making procedures, and programmes that shape the evolution 
and use of the Internet” (Wagner 2016). This will become more critical 
because of the rapid change and maturing of information technologies, 
including machine learning, natural language processing, face recognition, 
robotics, blockchains, and cryptocurrencies. Ultimately these technologies 
will converge with the Internet of Things (IoT), and as they do the inter -
relationship between humans and machines will pose unprecedented chal -
lenges for human societies and how they are governed (Fry et al. 2015). 
Meanwhile, many social activities increasingly take place online using the 
functionality of networks via commonly used connected devices, creating 
what have been called social machines, which themselves generate impor -
tant quantities of data (Shadbolt et al. 2019).
Hence, an infrastructure is critical to overcoming the main barrier of web 
data collection and analytics essential for evidence- based study on the web. 
In addition, the speed at which data interactions occur on the web means 
that the data become obsolete and outdated at a rapid pace even if regular 
snapshots are taken (Hall et al. 2013).
Governance Challenges for a Distributed Data Infrastructure
The Need for an Infrastructure
Data have become the new fuel empowering decision- making in almost 
every sector. Governments make a wealth of public data openly available 
(on sites such as www  . data . gov, United States; www  . data . gov  . uk, United King -
dom; data . gov  . in, India; and www  . data . gov  . au, Australia) under different 
licensing based on their use. But observing a restricted number of siloed data -
sets that are deemed nonsensitive provides a narrow view to any problem 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  127
or issue. The real value of data comes from the broader perspective of mul -
tiple datasets brought together around a specific question or issue and from 
a range of sources (Fry et al. 2015), which suggests the idea of a platform to 
bring together data for the purpose of analysis and interrogation that fur -
nishes methods and tools that enable researchers to locate, analyze, com -
pare, and interpret information consistently and reliably (Hall et al. 2013; 
Hall et al. 2014; Tinati et al. 2015; Tiropanis et al. 2013).
It goes without saying that a centralized data store cannot possibly scale; 
the model proposed here is a platform where anyone with a dataset who 
wishes (and has the right) to share it could display the metadata to enable 
the data to be discovered by potential users. We call such rights holders data 
owners as a shorthand— they include data controllers whose data are per -
sonal under European data protection legislation, although the data shared 
via the Web Observatory need not be personal. Such data owners could, in 
principle, be anyone able to exercise rights to share, including governments, 
corporations, nongovernmental organizations, educational institutes, scien -
tists and academics, or even private individuals (for instance, someone who 
wished to consider sharing his or her medical data with selected health care 
providers or researchers). However, joining the Web Observatory and adver -
tising metadata does not mean that the data owner is obliged to share; the 
owner remains in control (and in particular, a controller of personal data 
would remain the data controller) and makes the decision to share. The 
Observatory is a distributed infrastructure to enable data discovery and shar -
ing, not an automatic distributor of data. Hence, sharing of the data takes 
place only when the dataset owners receive a request and only in accordance 
with the owners’ constraints, legal and ethical requirements, and business 
models. The governance of individual datasets remains with their owners; 
the responsibility of the infrastructure would be to provide protocols to 
support data discovery and sharing. To answer open questions and ensure 
open access, institutions owning data, or with common interests in sharing 
data, need to come together within the Web Observatory to build an active 
community engaging in experimentation and innovative problem- solving, 
involving the generation and sharing of both qualitative and quantitative 
data for evidence- based decision- making (Verhulst et al. 2014).
When data are especially sensitive (and this is not only personal data—  
consider, for instance, geologic data relevant to a fracking inquiry, which raises 
no privacy concerns), it may be that the data owner does not consider sharing 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025128 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
it at all. The owner might accept and process queries from third parties and 
return the results, perhaps using differential privacy techniques to ensure that 
the queries in aggregate aren’t disclosive. Or the owner may even refuse access 
to the data but may post visualizations of results from processing.
Indeed, any data owner could allow access to visualizations of data whether 
sensitive or nonsensitive or access to tools or techniques that have proved 
valuable for data analysis or visualization. The Observatory can be the reposi -
tory for anything valuable to the data analytics community, not simply 
metadata about valuable datasets. So, for example, the metadata describ -
ing transcripts of sessions of the Internet Governance Forum described 
by Cogburn in chapter 9 might be posted to the Web Observatory; those 
who could add value to those data could contact, via the Observatory, the 
rights holder and ask for access. Similarly, the mailing lists whose analy -
sis is described by Ten Oever, Milano, and Beraldo in chapter 10 could be 
discovered. The mailing lists may be sensitive, so sharing might take place 
only under very specific conditions (e.g., the terms and conditions of access 
might preclude publishing direct quotes). Meanwhile, limited access could 
be granted to the commercially sensitive data held by major search engines 
and social media companies, discussed by Jørgensen in chapter 8— if not to 
the data itself, at least to summaries, statistics, and visualizations, or perhaps 
such companies might accept a limited number of queries from academics 
and policy makers without compromising any comparative advantage the 
data are perceived to confer. This could be especially valuable for Internet 
governance, given the importance that such sites have in the ecosystem of 
the Internet. The value of this kind of eclecticism would help address dif -
ficulties in studying the private sector, multistakeholder governance, and 
overstudying open systems (see DeNardis’s chapter 1).
Though a distributed data infrastructure could and should be open to 
private and public actors, an early win could be the augmentation of cur -
rent government digital platforms and open datasets. Increasingly, digital 
governments require access to data services that are internally and exter -
nally produced, which often creates a complex ecosystem of social sys -
tems (Tinati et al. 2015). Thousands of datasets are now openly available 
through open data portals describing local businesses, city- sensor networks, 
and live transport and traffic data. But not all government data can be 
opened for access so easily, and not all the data governments use are gener -
ated or curated by them, what with outsourcing and other policy delivery 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  129
partnerships with government. In this context, there is an opportunity for 
a wrapper to expose and share government data, which importantly allows 
third parties to access and produce analytical and visual representations 
of the data while still retaining access control (Tinati et al. 2015). Further -
more, a data infrastructure would offer an opportunity for governments to 
link to nongovernmental datasets, enriching existing data and providing 
new insights not originally envisioned (Hall et al. 2013; Tiropanis et al. 
2013).
From the point of view of Internet governance, governments and non -
governmental actors could observe socio- technical phenomena from such 
an infrastructure via data from domains using web protocols (e.g., social 
media, crowdsourcing platforms, health care, city sensors). Data could be 
made available for those needing to make evidence- based policy decisions 
relating to Internet governance without exposing it as open data or indeed 
without the data owner having to surrender control over access at all. The 
Observatory provides the means for discovery and communication between 
potential consumers of the data and their owners and may itself be open 
or closed to new members. To the extent that the data are sensitive, the 
Web Observatory will inherit all the legal, ethical, and political issues relat -
ing to sharing sensitive data. The Observatory infrastructure does not solve 
these problems, but because control over the data remains with the data 
owners, neither does it create new information flows over which nobody 
has any control. In particular, it remains the decision of the data owners 
whether to share sensitive data (e.g., about a smart city) with someone who 
has requested access, to restrict its use for Internet governance purposes 
only, or alternatively, to share with a wider range of data consumers. To 
the extent that potentially sharing data about socio- technical phenomena 
has implications for wider society, the proposed Observatory infrastructure 
minimizes those implications. As a consequence, data governance, access 
to datasets, usage tracking to understand derivations of datasets, and user 
trust are major concerns for such an ecosystem. In the rest of this section, 
we describe these concerns in detail.
Challenges
An important aim is to provide strong support for user- centric transparency  
by enhancing end users’ awareness about their choices for data sharing, 
dependent on interactions with other stakeholders and the sensitivity of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025130 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
datasets, requiring case- by- case analysis of the use of data. Crafting the 
terms and conditions of data sharing requires addressing the questions 
of liability and responsibility of data sharing on the part of operators, 
data- sharing companies, and other stakeholders. The growing imbalance 
of power created between citizens and companies through the privileged 
access that corporations have to information on our collective social lives 
is set to become an increasingly pressing social and political issue (Davies 
2013; O’Hara 2015; and see also Jørgensen, chapter 8). Some key challenges 
need to be addressed by anyone proposing to share data:
Privacy  is critical for understanding data processing on shared datasets of 
personal data (or data derived from personal data), with cultural context an 
important consideration. Global rules may not be applicable, or sufficient, 
at the local scale (O’Hara 2019).
Open data  and the field of data integration generally has raised questions 
of interoperability, transparency, accountability, and reusability.
Trust in the integrity of data  is becoming even more important with auto -
mated data collection through smart devices and analytics being performed 
by a range of actors (even before we consider issues concerning the increasing 
tendency of malign actors to attempt to mislead— an economy that supports 
fake news farms could equally support fake data farms). Understanding the 
provenance of data and measuring its quality are key challenges.
Sovereignty  has made the questions of where data are stored and accessed 
especially relevant in the context of cloud storage, especially in light of 
increasing moves toward data nationalism (Chander and L ê 2014– 2015).
Uncertainty  about issues such as liability if data are misused and the secu -
rity of data following a share has been identified as a key blocker to data 
sharing (Hall and Pesenti 2017).
An infrastructure for amassing data for evidence- based reasoning about 
Internet governance will need to bring together diverse communities for 
data sharing and reuse across geopolitical and application contexts and 
across public, private, and nonprofit sectors. These are questions of cor -
porate social responsibility, as well as the ethical and legal consequences 
potentially faced by corporations involved in these controversies (Dutton 
and Peltu 2005). The challenges laid out here are even more critical with 
the rapid growth of technologies such as the IoT and artificial intelligence, 
which promote machine- to- machine interactions and capture a huge amount 
of potentially personal data about individuals.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  131
Data that are personal lead to much concern over the expansive digi -
tal surveillance practices of some countries, the rise of nation- specific 
data- localization policies that cite privacy concerns as a justification for 
requiring providers to store data within national borders (Chander and L ê 
2014– 2015), and emerging and controversial policies such as the right to be 
forgotten ruling in the European Union (DeNardis and Hackl 2015; O’Hara 
and Shadbolt 2015; O’Hara, Shadbolt, and Hall 2016). The emphasis of 
the EU General Data Protection Regulation on a notion of data protection 
delineated by a rich jurisprudence contrasts with countries like India that 
have yet to define privacy and countries like China where paternalism plays 
a larger part in policy than supporting the rights of autonomous individu -
als. In a data infrastructure, individual units are likely to align to local poli -
cies and laws, which may reduce legal concerns but at the same time raises 
the concern of interoperability across the network (O’Hara and Hall 2018).
Data, communications metadata, or data about networks provide a lot 
of actionable and personally identifiable information, especially when aug -
mented with auxiliary data. The routinization of extensive metadata collec -
tion as well as contextual content analysis is a fundamental departure from 
the Internet’s original end- to- end design (of locating intelligence at end 
points, technical neutrality toward packet contents, and using IP addresses 
simply as virtual identifiers) (DeNardis 2014). Moreover, identification tech -
nologies also collect information on the hardware for using the platform 
(device information) and software information, including browser type 
(software footprint) (DeNardis 2014). To address concerns about this, which 
will be essential to foster wider trust of the Web Observatory infrastructure, 
each resource on the infrastructure would need to be annotated with appro -
priate metadata to restrict access and use of the dataset and have the ability 
to notify the data owners and publishers in real time about possible privacy 
breaches and would need to be protected by a clear and understandable set 
of terms and conditions to prevent disclosure of personal information.
Finally, we note that if people are to have any control over their personal 
data, they need rights over the data and transparency about what is hap -
pening to it. But the exercise of these individual rights is truly effective only 
if an organization’s technology is fully responsive to them and has the right 
functionality embedded in it. The core individual data protection rights 
in the General Data Protection Regulation are the “right of access,” “right 
to rectification,” “right to erasure” (or the right to be forgotten), “right to 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025132 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
restrict processing,” “right to data portability,” and “right to object” (GDPR 
Individual Rights [n.d.]). In a functional sense, these rights require the tech -
nology to connect individuals to their personal data, the technology to 
classify the data with respect to the purpose of use or processing and for 
mapping the full data life cycle, the technology to make it searchable, and 
the technology to rectify it and perform erasure and anonymization. These 
are complex requirements and may not easily be incorporated, but at a 
minimum one would expect the implementation of provenance- tracking 
mechanisms to track data and application use to bring some measure of 
accountability to the system.
The Web Observatory
Clearly, the development of such a global infrastructure for data sharing is 
a major research question. In this section, we describe the concept of a web 
observatory that meets the infrastructure requirements set out in the previ -
ous section, as a distributed global resource in which datasets, analytical 
tools, and cross- disciplinary methodologies can be shared and combined 
to foster web science: the emerging interdisciplinary field of the study and 
engineering of large- scale distributed information systems, particularly the 
World Wide Web, with a focus on their cocreation by human users and 
participants (Hall et al. 2014; Shneiderman 2007; Tiropanis et al. 2013). 
The aim of the Web Observatory is to provide a locus for subject- centric 
management of data, to complement the current paradigm of organization-  
centric data management (Van Kleek et al. 2014) and support longitudinal 
web- science analysis.
Hall et al. (2013) proposed the idea of the Web Observatory3 to bootstrap 
the analytics to create evidence of newer concerns emerging from collated 
and archived data on the web. It provides the capability to curate datasets 
and aggregate interaction data (web clickstreams, dialogue from crowd -
sourcing platforms), descriptive data (demographics and geospatial data), 
behavioral data (usage history), and attitudinal data (opinions, preferences 
of stakeholders) (De Roure 2014; Hall et al. 2013; Tiropanis et al. 2013). It 
provides infrastructural support in the form of analytical tools and datasets 
to investigate methods and mechanisms by which people, as a collective 
society, could be effectively studied in academic research settings through 
analysis of the archival information traces they created online (Van Kleek 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  133
et al. 2014). It enables users to share data with each other, while retaining 
control over who can view, access, query, and download their data (Tinati et 
al. 2015). Web Observatory infrastructure would certainly enable the evolu -
tion of social machines as means of bottom- up coordination of problem-  
solving at scale (in terms of both providing the data to enable the academic 
study of social machines and supporting their operation where data are 
needed as input [Shadbolt et al. 2019]).
A web observatory infrastructure can be a generic set of desiderata. How -
ever, in this section we report on an attempt to implement these ideas in 
a specific system, the Web Observatory, with a definite article. The effort 
to create the Web Observatory has involved many different communities 
and organizations, including the Web Science Trust network of laboratories 
(WSTNet),4 other major research groups in this area, government agencies, 
public sector institutions, and industry (Hall et al. 2016; Price et al. 2017). 
The Web Observatory has formed partnerships with the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C), the Open Data Institute (ODI) in the United Kingdom, 
the Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FOKUS), the 
Web Foundation, and a growing list of industrial collaborators (Tiropanis 
et al. 2013). Also, researchers affiliated with the Web Observatory at the 
University of Southampton have cooperated with the University of South 
Australia to support data- driven government policy making for the Ade -
laide government (Fry et al. 2015). The Web Observatory, which is based at 
Southampton, has provided access to multiple government and academic 
datasets to answer questions concerning the provision of public services on 
the basis of the demographic landscape of Adelaide’s neighborhoods.
The Web Observatory contains metadata, catalogs of data, visualizations, 
analyses, and tools. Hence, if standards were established to express metadata 
(e.g., using linked data formalisms), the Web Observatory could be distrib -
uted in a network, each node of which could be located remotely, because 
of the interoperability that would result. The Web Observatory therefore 
operates as a decentralized, distributed infrastructure for sharing data and 
analysis (Tinati et al. 2015; Tiropanis et al. 2013) on the Web. It is, in other 
words, a network of web observatories (we refer to observatories within the 
network as nodes ). The Southampton University Web Observatory (SUWO) 
mentioned in the previous paragraph is one node of the network.
Appropriate standards to enable the discovery, use, combination, and 
persistence of datasets and tools are being developed in the W3C Web 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025134 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
Observatory community group5 (Hall et al. 2014), established to foster dis -
cussions on standardization requirements essential to enable interoperabil -
ity between available resources and on identifying the opportunities for 
industry and global government agencies to contribute large- scale systems, 
expertise, and datasets.
Architecture of the Web Observatory
Figure 6.1 describes the different architectural components of the Web Obser -
vatory. The Web Observatory harmonizes data sources from, for example, 
social media, open data repositories, and Internet archives. An interoperable 
catalog makes the metadata available in compliant standards. These data are 
then available to researchers through the visualization and analytical tools 
and methodologies available on Web Observatory nodes. In making this web 
of observatories possible, the following principles are required in the deploy -
ment of Web Observatory nodes or instances (Tiropanis et al. 2014):
• Resources related to the Web Observatory (projects, datasets, analytical 
applications, and people) need to have unique identifiers, preferably 
uniform resource identifiers or application programming interface (API) 
access points.
• There need to be explicit links between analytical applications and the 
datasets that they use.
• There need to be explicit links between Web Observatory resources and 
related use, scholarship, and discourse.
• Metadata should be published for all available resources in a Web Obser -
vatory instance to enable search.
• Datasets and analytical applications hosted or listed on a Web Observa -
tory node can be public or private; the publisher needs to control who 
gains access to them.
• It should be possible to enable access for identified individuals (or to 
applications using their credentials) to specific datasets or applications 
hosted in local or remote datasets.
• It should be possible to support distributed queries across Web Observa -
tory instances and to make computational resources on each instance 
available to that end.
The Web Observatory architecture is implemented as a reverse proxy 
server6 enabling the data owners to host datasets at their local sites but also 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  135
allowing the observatory users to discover it through metadata search (Price 
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017). It adopts a decentralized architecture in which 
resources can be accessed in situ without the additional need of gathering 
them centrally. Users can publish to the Web Observatory resources from 
outside, and data generated within the Web Observatory such as system logs 
and user information are made available as datasets and listed in the Web 
Observatory itself (Siow, Wang, and Tiropanis 2016). The discoverability of 
the metadata is defined by the data owner or publisher on the Observatory 
as private or public. A Web Observatory node may be initiated by individuals 
for use as a personal observatory (Siow, Tiropanis, and Hall 2016). Differ -
ent observatory nodes are not obliged to host the same software but should 
comply with the underlying principles of the Web Observatory. A distributed 
search tool is available to allow the end users to search for datasets and tools 
across the distributed Web Observatory using the metadata attributes.
The following core functionalities of the Web Observatory infrastructure 
support engagement across communities and emphasize ethical and legal 
rectitude.
Metadata of datasets and analytical tools Metadata describing the listed 
resources and projects is published. In this way, descriptions of resources 
can be harvested and listed in other Web Observatory nodes or web- based Novel analysis
and visualization
methods
Semantic
catalogsHarmonized
accessHarvesting and
archivingInterdisciplinary
e-science
Open standardsSocial innovation
Catalogs, and
analysis and
visualization toolsHarmonization
with other
observatories
Varying governance re quirementsThe Web Observatory
Repositories
with authorized
accessSocial media Internet Archivee-Science
infrastructuresOpen data cloud
Figure 6.1
Web Observatory components and governance requirements.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025136 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
resources. If a listed application (or visualization) uses a listed dataset, the 
link is explicitly mentioned in the metadata for the application. Metadata 
not only facilitate accurate discovery but also provide links between related 
resources. For example, datasets and the analytics produced from them are 
linked at the metadata level. By traversing these links, users can browse 
through a large network of analytical resources more effectively (Siow, 
Wang, and Tiropanis 2016). Once related resources are identified, users and 
applications can access them via the Web Observatory in a secure way.
Access control for sharing datasets The Web Observatory allows users 
to access datasets and analytics via a web interface. It also provides an API 
for applications to programmatically access analytical resources (Madaan et 
al. 2016; Siow, Wang, and Tiropanis 2016; Tinati et al. 2015; Tiropanis et 
al. 2014). The API is protected by OAuth 2.07 to ensure that access to any 
resource is controlled by the resource owner and can be delegated to applica -
tions without having to reveal the underlying credentials. Applications can 
also access multiple datasets simultaneously, through the API, to perform 
complementary analytics and information fusion. It is also possible to access 
live data streams and build real- time analytics (Madaan et al. 2016; Siow, 
Wang, and Tiropanis 2016; Tinati et al. 2015; Tiropanis et al. 2014). The Web 
Observatory lets users list or host datasets that are public or private. Access 
to private datasets is managed by the data owner, who hosts them on a Web 
Observatory node. Because access to datasets can be restricted, access to appli -
cations that make use of those datasets must be restricted as well (Tiropanis 
et al. 2013; Tiropanis et al. 2014). Resources can be queried using the Web 
Observatory API, which uses a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) structured 
query language, and the mappings to the types of data stores are handled by 
the Web Observatory API and processed on the server side. This API acts as a 
secure middle layer between dataset locations and the end- user connections 
(Wang et al. 2017). The Web Observatory deploys an access control mecha -
nism so that private datasets and analytics containing sensitive information 
are protected and accessible only to authorized users and applications.
Provenance for data quality The Web Observatory supports provenance 
of datasets and also their derivatives using the W3C PROV standard. This 
is achieved by adding provenance documents and linking datasets to prov -
enance uniform resource identifiers in the Web Observatory administration 
interface. PROV- AQ8 provides a pingback mechanism to discover provenance 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  137
information and has been integrated into the Web Observatory infrastruc -
ture. This helps data publishers understand how the dataset has been used 
once it has been created and further supports usage tracking, transparency, 
and ultimately, users’ control over how their datasets are used.
Terms and conditions for innovation on the Web Observatory The PRO-  
SENT model (Wilson et al. 2016) considers whether the downstream use of 
datasets is in agreement with the data consent given by the data publishers on 
the Web Observatory platform. However, Wilson et al. (2016) also highlight 
the complexity of determining the consent violation and safeguarding the 
resources available on the Web Observatory owing to its distributed nature.
The Web Observatory and Data Governance Challenges
The distributed Web Observatory architecture is designed to address the 
governance challenges raised in the previous section. The important ingre -
dient is the distributed nature of the resource, which allows data controllers 
to retain control, to determine how discoverable their data are, and ulti -
mately to decide who gets access and under what conditions. In particular, 
we draw attention to the following aspects.
Privacy The data owner’s specified metadata description is available on the 
Web Observatory, and any access request is evaluated against the visibility of 
the resource. The data owners and publishers define partial or complete meta -
data for the discoverability of their resources on the Web Observatory platform.
Openness Each observatory node defines its own sharing attributes on 
specific datasets. The Observatory uses reverse proxy, and the datasets are 
stored in the jurisdiction where they originated. The datasets available can 
be open or private as specified by the data owner or publisher.
Integrity The provenance of analytical tools and datasets and the history 
of use provide a basis for trust for end users because they can see the deriva -
tions of their datasets, their transformation, and the context in which they 
have been used. Access patterns and usage tracking can be used to quantify 
the liability and accountability of stakeholders for data use, clarifying legal 
issues.
Sovereignty The Observatory connects individual and organizational 
stores. It does not mandate that end users store the data within the Obser -
vatory node; rather, the datasets can be hosted at the end user’s site.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025138 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
Uncertainty The support for access controls, provenance, and terms and 
conditions for innovation all help mitigate the uncertainty about liability 
and so forth. In the future, one could imagine the Web Observatory produc -
ing pro forma agreements for sharing and a set of best practices (cf. O’Hara 
2019). However, given the international and cross- jurisdictional nature 
of the exercise, it is unlikely that this problem can be solved entirely by 
infrastructure.
Conclusion
As the cyber and real worlds become harder to treat separately with every 
new technology adoption, data are an increasingly important input to 
evidence- based policy making and to Internet governance questions that 
often arise because of the innovative ways people interact with the web 
(a 2019 project explores the infrastructural, technological, and legal issues 
involved with creating the Web Observatory to share data from the IoT9). 
This chapter describes how the diverse communities of academia, industry, 
and the public sector can be brought together to understand the evolution 
of the web and cocreate methodological evidence using the Web Obser -
vatory ecosystem to inform web and Internet governance policy devel -
opment. The Web Observatory methodology itself, however, raises many 
governance issues of its own, and this chapter describes how its distinctive 
set of principles and freedom of data governance supports safe, ethical, and 
legal access to Observatory datasets and tools to support longitudinal data 
analysis and policy making across time, geopolitical boundaries, and topics.
Knowledge inferred from data in the Web Observatory about security, 
surveillance, and the promotion of state propaganda through social media 
platforms could provide evidence to policy makers to understand the effects 
of different national and supranational views of how the Internet should 
be controlled and developed. It has been argued that some governments 
are warping the Internet by attempting to align information flows with 
their jurisdictional boundaries (Chander and L ê 2014– 2015; Mueller 2017; 
and see Mueller and Badiei’s chapter 2). Beyond that, there is evidence of 
four different visions of the Internet coming to the fore, which are affect -
ing its governance, driven by ideals such as openness, privacy, paternalism, 
and commercial imperatives. We also need to take account of government-  
sponsored hacking behavior occurring at scale, an ideological view that 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  139
counterbalances the state- centric view (O’Hara and Hall 2018, 2020); these 
are the conflicting values mentioned specifically as a challenge in chap -
ter 1. Resolving these conflicts is critical in the current fragmented scene 
of Internet governance, where we need to contrast national lenses with 
the multistakeholder view and with views such as that of the EU, which is 
using legislation such as the General Data Protection Regulation to protect 
individuals’ online data while simultaneously projecting political power 
beyond its boundaries. Of course, the matter is complicated by the possibil -
ity that the Web Observatory itself requires certain ideological assumptions 
(for instance, openness) as a precondition for operating at all.
We have mentioned en passant a number of the challenges to Inter -
net governance research set out in chapter 1; it should be clear by now 
that an architecture like the Web Observatory, by making the invisible vis -
ible through furnishing data, will help address most— although not all— of 
those challenges to some degree at least. We are left only with the con -
cluding suggestion that the Web Observatory itself is one of the tools that 
need to be created, supported, and honed to enable Internet governance 
research, as cited in the final challenge. However, the Observatory is not 
only a tool; it demands a community of institutions prepared to make their 
data visible if not open, to cooperate in the research task, and to develop 
sufficient trust to facilitate the use and reuse of data. To that end, the sta -
tus of the Web Observatory as a tool, as with any practicable technology, 
depends crucially both on architecture and on practice.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by SOCIAM: The Theory and Practice of Social 
Machines. The SOCIAM Project is funded by the UK Engineering and Physi -
cal Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under grant number EP/J017728/1 
and comprises the Universities of Southampton, Oxford, and Edinburgh.
Notes
1. “Hypertext Transfer Protocol— HTTP/1.1,” IETF Network Working Group, Request 
for Comments 2616, June 1999, https:// www . w3 . org / Protocols / rfc2616 / rfc2616 . html  .
2. “Hypertext Markup Language— 2.0,” IETF Network Working Group, Request for 
Comments 1866, November 1995, https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1866  .
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025140 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
3. “Web Observatory,” accessed October 6, 2019, https:// webobservatory . soton . ac . uk /   .
4. “WSTNet Laboratories,” WebScience Trust, accessed October 6, 2019, http://  
webscience . org / wstnet - laboratories /   .
5. “Web Observatory Community Group,” World Wide Web Consortium, accessed 
October 6, 2019, https:// www . w3 . org / community / webobservatory /   .
6. “What Is a Reverse Proxy Server?,” NGINX, accessed October 6, 2019, https://  
www . nginx . com / resources / glossary / reverse - proxy - server /   .
7. “OAuth 2.0,” OAuth . net, accessed October 6, 2019, https:// oauth . net / 2 /   .
8. “PROV- AQ: Provenance Access and Query,” W3C Working Group Note, April 30, 
2013, https:// www . w3 . org / TR / prov - aq /   .
9. “IoT Observatory,” Themes, PETRAS, accessed October 6, 2019, https:// www  
. petrashub . org / portfolio - item / iot - observatory /   .
References
Banyan. (2017, October 26). Is the world getting Myanmar wrong? The Economist . 
Retrieved from https:// www . economist . com / news / asia / 21730684 - future - not - long - ago  
- deemed - bright - now - feels - bleak - world - getting - myanmar - wrong
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets 
and freedom . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
boyd, d. (2008). Facebook’s privacy trainwreck: Exposure, invasion, and social con -
vergence. Convergence, 14 (1), 13– 20.
Chander, A., & L ê, U. (2014– 2015). Data nationalism. Emory Law Journal, 64 (3), 677– 739.
Davies, T. (2013, October 9). Web observatories: The governance dimensions [Blog 
post]. Retrieved from http:// www . opendataimpacts . net / 2013 / 10 / web - observatories  
- the - governance - dimensions /
DeNardis, L. (2010). The emerging field of Internet governance. Yale Information 
Society Project Working Paper Series . Retrieved from https:// papers . ssrn . com / sol3  
/ papers . cfm ? abstract_id =1678343
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Hackl, A. M. (2015). Internet governance by social media platforms. 
Telecommunications Policy, 39 (9), 761– 770.
De Roure, D. (2014, March 20). Web Observatories, e- research and the importance 
of collaboration. WST Webinar Series. Retrieved from https:// www . slideshare . net  
/ davidderoure / web - observatories - and - eresearch
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  141
Dutton, W. H., & Peltu, M. (2005). The emerging Internet governance mosaic: Con -
necting the pieces. SSRN . Retrieved from https:// ssrn . com / abstract =1295330
Fry, L., Hall, W., Koronios, A., Mayer, W., O’Hara, K., Rowland- Campbell, A., 
Stumptner, M., Tinati, R., Thanassis, T., & Wang, X. (2015). Governance in the age 
of social machines: The web observatory. The Australia and New Zealand School of 
Government. Retrieved from https:// eprints . soton . ac . uk / 378417 /
GDPR Individual rights. (n.d.). Retrieved December 6, 2017, from https:// ico . org . uk  
/ for - organisations / guide - to - the - general - data - protection - regulation - gdpr / individual  
- rights /
Hall, W., Hendler, J., & Staab, S. (2017). A manifesto for web science@ 10. arXiv . 
Retrieved from https:// arxiv . org / abs / 1702 . 08291
Hall, W., & Pesenti, J. (2017). Growing the artificial intelligence industry in the UK . 
Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport and Department for Business, Energy 
& Industrial Strategy. Part of the Industrial Strategy UK and the Commonwealth. 
Retrieved from https:// www . gov . uk / government / publications / growing - the - artificial  
- intelligence - industry - in - the - uk
Hall, W., Tiropanis, T., Tinati, R., Booth, P., Gaskell, P., Hare, J., & Carr, L. (2013, 
May 1– 3). The Southampton University Web Observatory . Paper presented at the First 
International Workshop on Building Web Observatories. ACM Web Science . Retrieved 
from https:// eprints . soton . ac . uk / 352287 /
Hall, W., Tiropanis, T., Tinati, R., & Wang, X. (2016). Building a global network of 
web observatories to study the web: A case study in integrated health management. 
Qatar Foundation Annual Research Conference Proceedings, 2016 (1), 3092.
Hall, W., Tiropanis, T., Tinati, R., Wang, X., Luczak- Rösch, M., & Simperl, E. (2014). 
The web science observatory: The challenges of analytics over distributed linked 
data infrastructures. ECRIM News, 2014 (96), 29– 30. Retrieved from https:// eprints  
. soton . ac . uk / 361437 / 1 / ERCIM - 69_p29 - 30 . pdf
Hargittai, E. (2010). Digital na(t)ives? Variation in Internet skills and uses among 
members of the “net generation.” Sociological Inquiry, 80 (1), 92– 113.
Hildebrandt, M. (2016). Smart technologies and the end(s) of law novel entanglements of 
law and technology . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Kittur, A., Chi, E., Pendleton, B. A., Suh, B., & Mytkowicz, T. (2007). Power of the 
few vs. wisdom of the crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. World Wide 
Web, 1 (2), 19.
Lanier, J. (2010). You are not a gadget . New York, NY: Knopf.
Madaan, A., Tiropanis, T., Srinivasa, S., & Hall, W. (2016). Observlets: Empowering 
analytical observations on Web Observatory. In Proceedings of the 25th International 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025142 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
Conference Companion on World Wide Web  (pp. 775– 780). Geneva, Switzerland: Inter -
national World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee. Retrieved from https://  
doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2872518 . 2890593
Mueller, M. (2017). Will the Internet fragment?  Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Ngamassi, L., Ramakrishnan, T., & Rahman, S. (2016). Use of social media for disas -
ter management: A prescriptive framework. Journal of Organizational and End User 
Computing, 28 (3), 122– 140. http:// dx . doi . org / 10 . 4018 / JOEUC . 2016070108
O’Hara, K. (2015). Data, legibility, creativity … and power. IEEE Internet Computing, 
19(2), 88– 91.
O’Hara, K. (2019). Data trusts: Ethics, architecture and governance for trustworthy 
data stewardship. Retrieved from http:// dx . doi . org / 10 . 5258 / SOTON / WSI - WP001  .
O’Hara, K., & Hall, W. (2018). Four Internets: The geopolitics of Internet governance  (Paper 
no. 206). Centre for International Governance Innovation. Retrieved from https://  
www . cigionline . org / publications / four - internets - geopolitics - digital - governance
O’Hara, K., & Hall, W. (2020). Four Internets. Communications of the ACM, 63 (3), 
28–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3341722
O’Hara, K., & Shadbolt, N. (2015). The right to be forgotten: Its potential role in a 
coherent privacy regime. European Data Protection Law Review, 1 (3), 178– 189.
O’Hara, K., Shadbolt, N., & Hall, W. (2016). A pragmatic approach to the right to be 
forgotten . Global Commission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 26). 
Centre for International Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from 
https:// www . cigionline . org / publications / pragmatic - approach - right - be - forgotten
Price, S., Hall, W., Earl, G., Tiropanis, T., Tinati, R., Wang, X., …  & Groflin, A. 
(2017, April). Worldwide Universities Network (WUN) Web Observatory: Apply -
ing lessons from the web to transform the research data ecosystem. In Proceedings 
of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion  (pp. 1665–  
1667). Geneva, Switzerland: International World Wide Web Conferences Steering 
Committee.
Shadbolt, N., O’Hara, K., De Roure, D., & Hall, W. (2019). The theory and practice of 
social machines . Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Shneiderman, B. (2007). Web science: A provocative invitation to computer science. 
Communications of the ACM, 50 (6), 25– 27.
Singh, J., & Haziq, M. (2016). Myanmar’s Rohingya conflict: Foreign jihadi brewing . S. 
Rajaratnam School of International Studies commentary CO16259. Retrieved from 
https:// www . rsis . edu . sg / rsis - publication / icpvtr / co16259 - myanmars - rohingya - con flict  
- foreign - jihadi - brewing /  #  . Xi7QmzKgLIU
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Web Observatories  143
Siow, E., Tiropanis, T., & Hall, W. (2016, October). PIOTRe: Personal Internet of Things 
repository . Poster presented at the International Semantic Web, Demos, Japan.
Siow, E., Wang, X., & Tiropanis, T. (2016, May). Facilitating data- driven innova -
tion using VOICE observatory infrastructure. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Data-  
Driven Innovation on the Web  (p. 5). New York, NY: ACM.
Stevens, D., & O’Hara, K. (2015). The devil’s long tail: Religious and other radicals in the 
Internet marketplace . London, UK: Hurst.
Stieglitz, S., & Dang- Xuan, L. (2013). Social media and political communica -
tion: A social media analytics framework. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 3 (4), 
1277– 1291.
Tinati, R., Wang, X., Tiropanis, T., & Hall, W. (2015). Building a real- time web obser -
vatory. IEEE Internet Computing, 19 (6), 36– 45.
Tiropanis, T., Hall, W., Hendler, J., & de Larrinaga, C. (2014). The Web Observatory: 
A middle layer for broad data. Big Data, 2 (3), 129– 133.
Tiropanis, T., Hall, W., Shadbolt, N., De Roure, D., Contractor, N., & Hendler, J. 
(2013). The web science observatory. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 28 (2), 100– 104.
Turkle, S. (2005). The second self: Computers and the human spirit . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Twenge, J. M., Joiner, T. E., Rogers, M. L., & Martin, G. N. (2018). Increases in 
depressive symptoms, suicide- related outcomes, and suicide rates among US adoles -
cents after 2010 and links to increased new media screen time. Clinical Psychological 
Science, 6 (1), 3– 17.
Vaidhyanathan, S. (2007). The Googlization of everything and the future of copy -
right. University of California Davis Law Review, 40 , 1207– 1231.
van Kleek, M., Smith, D. A., Tinati, R., O’Hara, K., Hall, W., & Shadbolt, N. R. (2014, 
April). 7 billion home telescopes: Observing social machines through personal data 
stores. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web  (pp. 915–  
920). New York, NY: ACM.
Verhulst, S., Noveck, B. S., Raines, J., & Declerq, A. (2014). Innovations in global gov -
ernance: Toward a distributed Internet governance ecosystem . Global Commission on 
Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 5). Centre for International Governance 
Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / publications  
/ innovations - global - governance - toward - distributed - internet - governance - ecosystem
Wagner, F. R. (2016, November). The Internet governance ecosystem: Where we are 
and the path ahead. In Proceedings of the 22nd Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and 
the Web  (pp. 5– 6). New York, NY: ACM.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025144 W. Hall, A. Madaan, and K. O’Hara
Wang, X., Madaan, A., Siow, E., & Tiropanis, T. (2017, April). Sharing databases on 
the web with Porter Proxy. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World 
Wide Web Companion  (pp. 1673– 1676). Geneva, Switzerland: International World 
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Wilson, C., Tiropanis, T., Rowland- Campbell, A., & Fry, L. (2016). Ethical and legal 
support for innovation on web observatories. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Data-  
Driven Innovation on the Web  (p. 1). New York, NY: ACM.
Wong, J. C., Safi, M., & Rahman, S. A. (2017, September 20). Facebook bans Rohingya 
group’s posts as minority faces “ethnic cleansing.” The Guardian . Retrieved from 
https:// www . theguardian . com / technology / 2017 / sep / 20 / facebook - rohingya - muslims  
- myanmar
Zuboff, S. (2019). The age of surveillance capitalism: The fight for a human future at the 
new frontier of power . London, UK: Profile.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025No one seriously thinks of the Internet as a static system. By both design and 
effect, the Internet ecosystem exists in an inherently plastic and fluid state. 
In two very particular ways— in terms of both its scale and composition— the 
Internet has morphed from its early beginnings as a small set of networked 
research computers into something much bigger and far more diverse.
Each day, for example, thousands of new entrants connect to the Inter -
net for the very first time. While year- over- year growth of the Internet- using 
population is slowing, it remains above 10 percent per annum (Meeker 2017, 
6). With 3.7 billion users in 2016 (Internet World Stats 2017), this rapid pace 
of change resulted in potentially over 4 billion users in 2018. By dint of global 
demographics, many of these new users hail from developing- world coun -
tries and more autocratic regimes, potentially leading to growing levels of 
contention in the global Internet governance regime (Bradshaw et al. 2015).
Increasingly, the Internet is also losing its human face as it rapidly 
becomes predominately an interconnection of nonhuman devices. By dint 
of sheer numbers, the Internet of Things (IoT), as it is commonly known, is 
fundamentally changing the nature of the online environment. In 2014, for 
example, there were some 3.8 billion IoT devices (Gartner Research 2015). 
By 2016, that number was predicted to have increased to 6.39 billion. In 
2015, Gartner Research (2015) forecasted that almost 21 billion IoT devices 
could be connected to the Internet by 2020. In 2020, Statista Research puts 
the number of IoT devices at 30.73 billion and offers a prediction of 74.44 
billion devices online by 2025 (Statista 2020). Moreover, while the pace of 
new- user growth is slowing, the rate of new IoT interconnections is still 
in an acceleratory phase, exhibiting a classic S- shaped pattern of innova -
tion diffusion that was earlier followed by Internet connectivity as a whole 
(Hampson and Jardine 2016; Rogers 2010).7 Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously 
When Measuring Cybersecurity
Eric Jardine
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025146 E. Jardine
These changes to the underlying user base and composition of the Inter -
net are fundamental. The wider Internet governance literature has accom -
modated the changing Internet landscape well. For example, as detailed in 
chapter 3 by Mueller and Badiei, Internet governance— and literature on the 
governance of the Internet more generally— has undergone several distinct 
phases of work and focus since the early 1990s, with a big move toward 
securitization and concerns over privacy since 2010. Likewise, Cogburn 
in chapter 9 shows with a quantitative textual analysis of Internet Gover -
nance Forum (IGF) transcripts that the dominant themes at the IGF have 
changed over time. In 2006, the three dominant themes were “mobile,” 
“youth,” and “ICANN” (the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers). In 2011, the focus had shifted toward more rights- based issues, 
with “human rights,” “young people,” and “freedom of expression” being 
the most expressed phrases. Lastly, in 2017, changes again occurred with 
“women,” “cybersecurity,” and “news” being the top phrases in the corpus 
of IGF text. Other research has also started to contemplate what will hap -
pen to Internet governance when all devices are interconnected (Van Eeten 
2017) or the implications of the IoT for law and policy within the wider 
Internet governance regime (DeNardis and Raymond 2017). In short, cop -
ing with change is a big part of Internet governance practice, and it is well 
captured in many strands of the literature.
And yet, as I argue here, coping with ecosystem change at the level of 
cybersecurity measurement is less often done. When developing metrics to 
measure and assess the state of cybersecurity, the changing scale and compo -
sition of the Internet is often ignored. This error is implicit in the measures 
themselves. Two errors, in particular, are potentially distorting our sense of the 
state of cybersecurity. First, trends in security incidents as reported by informa -
tion technology (IT) security vendors and governments tend to be depicted as 
absolute count (e.g., 1 million web- based attacks in 2016). This number fails 
to account for the significant increase in new users of the Internet (Jardine 
2015, 2018). As the ecosystem grows, attacks, hacks, or vulnerabilities will also 
increase, everything else being equal. For measures of cybersecurity incidents 
to be meaningful, they need to be expressed as a rate, which requires that the 
absolute count of security incidents, say, be normalized around the size of the 
ecosystem, be it users, websites, data flows, or emails.
The second way in which current measures of cybersecurity are poten -
tially misleading is a result of their often extreme level of aggregation (Jardine 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  147
2017). Devices and users of every kind are often grouped together as if they 
are effectively the same thing. The trouble here is that different parts of the 
ecosystem are growing faster than others, and moreover, the fastest- growing 
parts, such as the IoT, tend to be the most susceptible to being hacked (HP 
2017). This pairing creates a very real danger of what is known as Simpson’s 
Paradox, in which aggregate trends in security incidents show things get -
ting worse while the disaggregated trends show the state of online security 
to be improving over time (Jardine 2017). Data from US data breaches can 
showcase the problem, but simulation results suggest that the phenomenon 
occurs in any situation in which groups are differentially vulnerable, and the 
fastest- growing group is the most vulnerable of the lot.
In the chapter’s first section, I discuss trends in current cybersecurity 
metrics. I illustrate several potential perils and pitfalls in this section, too, 
and propose some cautionary steps that can help researchers produce the 
best possible metrics of cybersecurity. In the second section, I show that 
even the best cybersecurity measures will produce biased over- time trends 
if they do not take into account the ongoing growth Internet denominator, 
to use the mathematical term. The third section points to existing over-  
time trends in cybersecurity measures. It shows further how Simpson’s Para -
dox (or aggregation bias, as it is also known) exists in data breach data and 
plausibly biases many aggregate indicators of insecurity. I conclude with 
thoughts on why accurate measurement of trends in cybersecurity matters 
and how cybersecurity researchers can approach their topic to form the best 
possible descriptive inferences.
What We Know about Measuring Cybersecurity
Measures of insecurity are never in short supply within the Internet ecosys -
tem. Yet many such measures are hardly worth the bytes on which they are 
stored. Even the simple estimate of the total cost of cybercrime is hugely 
variable. One study by the Center for Strategic and International Studies and 
the antivirus vendor McAfee (2014), for example, estimated that the likely 
global cost of cybercrime was on the order of $400 billion. More recent esti -
mates have ballooned these already significant numbers further still. A year 
after the center and McAfee produced their figure, Juniper Research (2015) 
estimated that the global costs of cybercrime could reach as high as $2 tril -
lion per annum as early as 2019. Another report, by the firm Cybersecurity 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025148 E. Jardine
Ventures, predicted that global cybercrime costs could actually have been 
as high as $3 trillion in 2015 and may well potentially increase by stunning 
proportions to as much as $6 trillion in 2021 (Morgan 2016).
Much of these costs are the result of an accumulation of a thousand 
small cuts. Each year, firms of all stripes and sizes are breached and their 
records are stolen or otherwise compromised. The Ponemon Institute con -
ducts an annual survey of the cost of data breaches among hundreds of 
firms globally. As detailed in figures 7.1 and 7.2, both the average cost per 
breached record and the average total cost that a firm faces in the aftermath 
of a breach are undergoing a general rise.1 In 2011, for example, the cost per 
breached record was $130. By 2017, the average breach cost had increased 
to $148 per record, amounting to a not inconsiderable increase of 13.9 per -
cent. The total average cost that firms need to absorb in the fallout of a data 
breach is also increasing, rising from $3.13 million in 2011 to roughly $3.86 
million in 2017 (Ponemon Institute 2013– 2018).
These trends in the cost of data breaches are roughly mirrored by the 
movement in their frequency. Within the United States, the Privacy Rights 
Clearinghouse (2020) has collated an ongoing record of US data breaches 
from 2005 onward. Both the number of breaches and the summed total 
number of compromised records is increasing over time. The total number 
of US data breaches (from all threat vectors), for example, increased from 
$130$136$145$154$158
$141$148
$0$20$40$60$80$100$120$140$160$180
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Average cost per record
Figure 7.1
Ponemon Institute average cost per record breached.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  149
136 in 2005 to 832 in 2016, amounting to a total increase of 512 percent. 
The total number of breached records, on the other hand, has increased 
at a far more prodigious rate. Here, the total number of compromised 
records2 has increased from 55,101,241 in 2005 to 4,626,238,665 in 2016, 
which includes the 2013 megabreach of 1 billion Yahoo! users. This change 
amounts to an increase of 8,296 percent. (We return to these numbers in 
the third section, as the story they tell can be deceptive.)
These numbers suggest that one massive ongoing shift in the cyberse -
curity environment is toward more pronounced outcomes, what Nassim 
Taleb (2010, 33– 34) would call the world of “extremistan.” This notion is 
broadly in line with much of the growth in data breaches being accounted 
for by the existence of so- called heavy tails, or extreme outliers that drive a 
lot of the variation (Edwards, Hofmeyr, and Forrest 2016). Growing digitiza -
tion, interconnectivity, and market concentration all affect cyber risk and 
help make the occurrence and fallout of a data breach far more pronounced 
(Geer, Jardine, and Leverett 2020).
These measures all point in the same approximate direction, indicating 
roughly that the state of cybersecurity is worsening. IT security practitioners 
have certainly internalized this message. The online Index of Cybersecurity 
(2020), for example, conducts a monthly survey of IT security professionals $3.13$3.50 $3.52$3.79$4.00
$3.62$3.86
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017$0.00$0.50$1.00$1.50$2.00$2.50$3.00$3.50$4.00$4.50
Total costs in millions
Figure 7.2
Ponemon Institute global data breach costs.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025150 E. Jardine
to gauge their concern over the state of the online environment. From a 
base value of 1,000 in March 2011, the index score has exhibited a decid -
edly worsening trajectory, moving to a score of 4,762 on July 4, 2019. These 
collective sentiments are broadly in line with the idea of former high- level 
policy makers who openly fret about the potentially severe consequences of 
a cyberattack. Former Homeland Security secretary Tom Ridge, for example, 
argued in late 2016, “Notwithstanding the pain and horror associated with 
a physical attack, … the potential for physical, human, and psychic impact 
with a cyberattack, I think, is far more serious” (Roberts 2016). Clearly, the 
general sentiment is that efforts to improve cybersecurity outcomes are, so 
far at least, a losing battle.
At the same time, however, there are a number of telling reasons to sug -
gest that we might know less than we think about the state of online secu -
rity. The broad point of the literature is that most measures are, as is often 
the case, biased— and only a very select few useful. What this means in 
practice is that our view that cybersecurity is a mug’s game might not be as 
well grounded in empirical reality as we might like.
Anderson and his colleagues, for example, produced a rigorous estimate 
of the cost of cybercrime, which is far less than the trillions upon trillions 
of dollars cited earlier. This research team started by disaggregating costs 
into defense costs, indirect losses, and the direct losses from cybercrime 
(2012, 5). The disaggregation of costs is an important step, as direct costs 
to victims or the benefits to attackers are often only a small portion of the 
overall social costs due to cybercrime. The difficulty is the working of net -
work externalities, only in reverse (Anderson and Moore 2006). Rather than 
the benefits of network interconnection increasing at the pace of Metcalfe’s 
Law (i.e., number of connected devices, n2), the tendency is for the costs of 
cybercrime to increase disproportionately as network interconnection goes 
up. But a majority of these social costs do not translate into dollars in the 
bank accounts of malicious actors.
The point is well shown by the huge gap that can exist between what 
cybercriminals make and the destruction that they can bring. In one study 
of the individual economics of phishing campaigns (Herley and Flor ên-
cio 2009), the authors persuasively argue that many estimates of the high 
value of phishing campaigns for individual attackers (sometimes on the 
order of thousands of dollars per day) is likely woefully inaccurate. Since 
phishing attacks target a common pool resource (users’ wallets) that cannot 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  151
regenerate at an infinite pace, the phishing activity of multiple attackers 
is likely to drive down the benefits until each attacker is basically earn -
ing what their skills would return in the noncriminal world. In more con -
crete dollar terms, Herley and Flor êncio (2009, 67) suggest that rather than 
earning thousands a day, as some accounts suggest, phishers in 2008 likely 
shared a $61 million pot some 113,000 ways, or roughly $540 per attacker. 
At the same time, the social cost of phishing campaigns is enormous, with 
billions being poured into defense and remediation.
Overall, these numbers suggest that estimates of the high- flying ben -
efits of cybercrime might be greatly exaggerated and that there is likely an 
asymmetry, due to network externalities, between malicious actor benefits 
and the damage done. But troubling estimations are not confined simply 
to metrics for the monetary gain to malicious actors. The problems with 
correctly measuring cybersecurity indicators of various stripes are manifold.
One such example is the lack of a common measurement foundation 
from which conclusions can be drawn (Brecht and Nowey 2013). A good 
concrete instance of this problem of sample composition and metric design 
is to look again at the cost of data breach studies produced by the Ponemon 
Institute. The object of Ponemon’s efforts are twofold: provide a static 
snapshot of what is going on in the ecosystem and provide an over- time 
measure to assess whether data breaches are getting better or worse. The 
Ponemon data breach studies are helpful on the first count but suffer from 
a shifting- sample problem on the second.
As detailed in table 7.1, the Ponemon results are based on a growing 
population of both countries (increasing from 8 in 2011 to 19 in 2017) 
and firms (from 199 in 2011 to 477 in 2017). The growing sample increases 
Table 7.1
Ponemon Institute’s shifting sample.
Countries Firms
2011 8 199
2012 9 277
2013 10 314
2014 11 350
2015 12 383
2016 13 419
2017 19 477
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025152 E. Jardine
coverage. But this shifting- sample population can also introduce biases 
when looking at the trends in the data over time. If a newly added country 
is from a highly targeted part of the world, then the average will be pulled 
up, especially since data breach outcomes are highly power- law distributed 
and characterized by extreme variance (Edwards, Hofmeyr, and Forrest 
2016). All the other countries could be performing the same or even better 
than before, but the new entrant to the sample makes the over- time trend 
appear as though things are worsening. Likewise, if the new firms that join 
the sample are highly targeted (firms from the finance or health care sec -
tors, say), then the averages could again be biased upward. The point, really, 
is that with a shifting- sample population it is hard to say if an increase in 
the average cost per breached record is really due to an increased cost per 
firm or due to the inclusion of new actors whose average cost per record is 
higher than the rest of the population under question (more on this prob -
lem of aggregation in the third section).
In some ways, the law of large numbers— in which averages become sta -
ble over a large enough population size— suggests that the shifting- sample 
base might not have much effect. Randomly sampling (which is not really 
what is being done) from the population of firms should eventually lead to 
a stable sample mean and normal distribution. However, stable means are 
common only in a Gaussian, or bell- shaped, distribution. When the phe -
nomenon that is being surveyed follows a more extreme distribution, such 
as an exponential or power- law distribution, then measures of average costs 
can become terribly misleading (Flor êncio and Herley 2013). Indeed, when 
power laws are at work, extreme values of outliers in the sample can cause 
shifts in the mean so radical that the average becomes nearly meaningless 
as a guide for policy.3 Median cost— which Ponemon does not, but probably 
should, use— is then a simple and far better estimation of a middling value.
A host of problems are added on to issues of incorrectly estimated costs, 
shifting samples, and extreme distributions. Many areas of the social world, 
for example, use voluntary reporting mechanisms to tally up who has been 
subjected to what and why. Surveys are a classic example. The problem here 
is that cybercrime surveys can be marred by a curious admixture of both 
under-  and overreporting (Flor êncio and Herley 2013; Kshetri 2006). For 
some, being the victim of a cybercrime is a traumatic event and one that 
people want to express out loud, in print or online, to whomever will listen. 
For others, incentives might align to discourage disclosure of a hack, which 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  153
probably happens in countries lacking mandatory data breach disclosure 
regulations for firms (Laube and B öhme 2016). Additionally, a lack of cyber -
security loss data stemming from incidents complicates risk pricing, neces -
sitating cleverly innovative (yet somewhat error- prone owing to extrinsic 
factors) actuarial models (Woods, Moore, and Simpson 2019).
Finally, it is more than possible that the production of cybersecurity 
metrics can be captured by vested interests. The most obvious potential set 
of culprits, but by no means the only ones, are IT security vendors. These 
companies are in the uncomfortable position of researching a topic and 
producing estimates about the state of cybersecurity while also selling a 
product the demand for which is based, at least in part, on perceptions of 
online insecurity. This tension does not always play out in favor of bias, but 
it often can. As Anderson and colleagues point out,
One problem with Symantec is a conflict of interest: their reports are published 
principally for marketing reasons. It is not surprising, then, that sometimes their 
data are consistently over- reported. For example, we studied more closely one 
statistic measured in several reports, which tracks the proportion of malicious 
code that exploits confidential information. In volume 12 of the report, covering 
January to June 2007, 65% of malicious code exploits confidential information, 
compared to just 53% in the previous six months. However, the earlier report 
claimed 66% for this period of July to December 2006. (2008)
There are, clearly, a host of different methodological and pragmatic 
biases that can cloud our view of cybersecurity. However, while improved 
measurement techniques that account for missing evidence, shifting sam -
ples, extreme distribution types, under-  and overreporting of statistics, and 
vested interests would all be a step in the right direction, even the best met -
rics as they currently stand will remain biased. The trouble here is that some 
fundamental changes to the Internet ecosystem— most notably its growing 
scale and shifting demographic constitution— have not been accounted for 
well enough in the formulation of cybersecurity metrics. In the next two 
sections, I detail the distorting effects that these oversights can have on our 
view of cybersecurity.
Expressing Cybersecurity Incidents as a Rate
In the analogue world, indicators of insecurity or crime are always expressed 
as a rate (for example, 1,000 armed robberies, murders, or burglaries per 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025154 E. Jardine
100,000 people). Expressions of this sort are useful because they correct for 
the simple fact that a larger population size should see more activity, both 
good and bad (see Jardine 2015, 2018). In an ecosystem with a denomina -
tor that is growing as fast as the Internet in terms of users, interconnec -
tions, traffic volume, and more, failing to correct for the changing size of 
the system will bias even the best- devised metrics of cybersecurity. The pub -
lication of statistics like the count of breached records is, in other words, 
inherently distortive and misleading.
Indeed, if the denominator (i.e., a measure of the size of the ecosys -
tem) is growing fast enough, then the divergence between counts (number 
of records breached) and rates (number of records breached per 100,000 
records or Internet users) can be significant, often so much so that one set 
of numbers could actually indicate that the state of cybersecurity is getting 
worse while the other indicates that things are getting better.
Consider, as a useful case in point, a comparison of the count of phishing 
websites taken from reports by the Anti- Phishing Working Group (2008–  
2016) with that same count normalized around the number of websites (see 
Jardine 2018 for more details on this analysis). As detailed in figure 7.3, 
phishing websites per quarter are steadily increasing in number. Certainly, 
more attack vectors do not always mean more insecurity necessarily. And 
phishing websites are a good example of that principle. With low latency 
blacklisting and other technical protections built into most modern brows -
ers, malicious websites are not likely to remain effective for very long and 
are far less likely now than in the past to be able to infect a passerby in a 
drive- by attack. That being said, for a constant level of technological protec -
tions, more threats should roughly translate into more insecurity, so leaving 
0100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000
Q1 - 2008
Q3 - 2008
Q1 - 2009
Q3 - 2009
Q1 - 2010
Q3 - 2010
Q1 - 2011
Q3 - 2011
Q1 - 2012
Q3 - 2012
Q1 - 2013
Q3 - 2013
Q1 - 2014
Q3 - 2014
Q1 - 2015
Q3 - 2015
Q1 - 2016
Q3 - 2016Total phishing
websites
Figure 7.3
Observed phishing websites.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  155
aside potential remedial countermeasures for a moment, let’s just assume 
that more phishing websites could mean more insecurity online. Under that 
assumption, figure 7.3 clearly shows a worsening state of online security.
A starkly different picture emerges if you look, not at the count of the 
total number of observed phishing websites, but instead at per year rate 
of phishing websites per 100 websites or per 1 million Google searches.4 
These two denominators measure two separate aspects that help contex -
tualize trends in the number of phishing websites. Obviously, phishing 
websites exist within a pool of all websites, so they are some proportion of 
the whole, just as the victims of crimes are some proportion of the whole 
population in a given area. Google searches are a measure of online activ -
ity. While Google’s PageRank algorithm ensures that people are not simply 
wandering around randomly online, Google search activity could capture 
the amount of time people are spending online and so the amount of time 
within which they might stumble across a malicious website.
Counts and rates, in this case, tell very different stories. As shown in 
figure 7.4, rather than seeing a worsening situation as was the case with 
more phishing websites, both normalized measures of the rate of phish -
ing websites are in decline. This declining rate suggests a couple of things. 
First, it means that the number of websites or Google searches is growing 
00.10.20.30.40.50.6
0100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000800,000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Rate of phishing websites
(light gray and black) Count of phishing
websites (dark gray)
Phishing websites Phishing websites per 100 websites
Phishing websites per 1,000,000 Google searches
Figure 7.4
Counts versus rates of phishing websites.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025156 E. Jardine
faster than the number of malicious websites. This differential growth rate 
effectively entails that the population within which phishing websites live 
(all websites) or people’s time online (Google searches) are outpacing the 
growth of phishing websites. Second, framed in propensity- based terms, 
these differential growth rates mean that it is increasingly much less likely  
that an average person doing average things online is going to encounter a 
malicious website. In this very important sense, using rates that capture the 
growing size of the Internet ecosystem when measuring cybersecurity tells 
a story of improved security.
Rates may or may not say that online security is getting better— if they 
deterministically did, then something is wrong with the measure. But, by 
simple dint of the mathematics involved, so long as the Internet ecosystem 
continues to grow, the rate will always paint a better picture than the abso -
lute count of incidents, vulnerabilities, or costs. Indeed, as I have shown 
before (Jardine 2015), when the Internet is getting bigger, rates will favor -
ably contrast with counts for year- over- year comparisons in one of the fol -
lowing three ways:
• The count says things are getting worse, but the rate says cybersecurity is 
getting better.
• The count says things are getting better, but the rate says cybersecurity is 
improving even faster.
• The count says things are getting worse, but the rate says that cybersecu -
rity is getting worse at a slower pace.
These differences are crucial, as they imply that a year- over- year count of 
zero- day exploits, security incidents, phishing attacks, and so on will be biased. 
Using the best- designed numerator measure in the world— a design that is 
challenging in its own right— helps avoid some of the problems sketched out 
in the first section, but a failure to normalize these very same metrics around 
the growing size of the Internet ecosystem will result in a flawed measure that 
is not only potentially exaggerating the poor state of cybersecurity but that 
may well say everything is getting worse when it is actually getting better.
Aggregation and Bias in Cybersecurity Measures
There is, too, another way in which cybersecurity researchers may fail to 
adequately grapple with the idea that the Internet is a dynamic system 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  157
that is growing and changing right under our feet. In this case, the pressing 
problem is the level of aggregation of most publicly available cybersecurity 
data. When data from various groups are aggregated, the results can fall 
prey to what is known as Simpson’s Paradox (Simpson 1951). When Simp -
son’s Paradox is at work, aggregate trends that show a worsening state of 
cybersecurity can actually be based on underlying data that show the state 
of cybersecurity to be improving year- over- year (Jardine 2017). Overaggre -
gation, in other words, can produce bias.
Unfortunately, a lot of currently available trend data in cybersecurity 
exist at just such an extreme level of aggregation. IT security software ven -
dors, such as Kaspersky Labs or Symantec, produce annual reports detailing 
the volume of threats that they contend with each year. While the data are 
a bit noisy, the general trend line observed by both companies is decidedly 
positive, tending toward more and more attacks over time.
Figure 7.5, for example, plots two forms of online attacks as observed by 
Kaspersky and Symantec. In Kaspersky’s case, its annual Security Bulletin 
(2008– 2016) contains a count of the total number of attacks launched from 
web- based sources, which would exclude some forms of malicious activ -
ity such as insider threats or USB- based malware. Symantec, for its part, 
includes a count for the number of blocked attacks in its annual Internet 
Security Threat Report (2013– 2016).
In both cases, observed attacks are generally going up over time. Kasper -
sky’s measure, for instance, has increased from 23,680,646 attacks in 2008 
0200,000,000400,000,000600,000,000800,000,0001,000,000,0001,200,000,0001,400,000,0001,600,000,0001,800,000,000
050,000,000100,000,000150,000,000200,000,000250,000,000300,000,000350,000,000400,000,000450,000,000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Kaspersky’s viewSymantec’s view
Symantec: Blocked attacks
Kaspersky: Attacks launched from web-based resources
Figure 7.5
Aggregate attacks over time.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025158 E. Jardine
to 798,113,087 attacks in 2015, amounting to a growth in attacks of some 
3,270 percent. Symantec’s blocked attacks have likewise increased, by 
some 139 percent, growing from 167,900,000 blocked attacks in 2012 to 
401,500,000 attacks in 2015. Obviously, the former point about the perils 
of count measures (as opposed to rates) suggest that these worsening trends 
might not be as bad as they seem. But these trends might be misleading for 
an additional reason: they fail to factor in the changing face of the Internet 
ecosystem. These statistics pay no attention to the type of devices being tar -
geted, the baseline vulnerability of different user groups, the sectors within 
which these devices are housed, or even the region of the world where the 
devices reside. Aggregating these differences is potentially a major source 
of bias.
Take another example of seemingly bad overall trends, where sufficiently 
disaggregated data allow for a more fine- grained analysis of the problem of 
aggregation. The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse provides a record of pub -
licly known data breaches in the United States. Asking what the trend is in 
data breaches and in the number of breached records shows the problem of 
overaggregation. Figure 7.6 shows the trend in the number of disclosed data 
breaches that resulted from all recorded attack vectors. There are generally 
more data breaches now than there were in the middle of the first decade 
of the 2000s. Figure 7.7 does the same for both the total count of breached 
136482456
355
271806 797897 903872
5548322005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Figure 7.6
Total number of breaches.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  159
records and the rate of breached records per one hundred thousand US-  
based Internet users. The trends track one another and are decidedly posi -
tive. From these three aggregate figures, whether the count of breaches or 
counts or rates of the number of compromised records, the primary conclu -
sion to be drawn seems to be that the trend in cybersecurity is heading in 
a worsening direction.
But to its credit, the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse also provides a record 
of attacks disaggregated by sector. This disaggregation allows an analysis of 
over- time trends at a finer- level detail. In other words, it allows a sense of 
what is happening in specific parts of the economy, not just overall. Using 
data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (2020), Table 7.2 highlights 
what is happening in the aggregated trend in the number of data breaches, 
the count of breached records, and the rate of breached records per one 
hundred thousand US Internet users. It also shows what is happening in 
each disaggregated sector.
Each aggregate measure tells the same story: cybersecurity is getting 
worse. The disaggregated story is far more nuanced and often the oppo -
site. When counting the total number of breaches, the aggregate trend is 
positive, but only three (other business, retail, and health care) experienced 
more breaches in 2005– 2016. In short, the total count of data breaches per 
year is declining in the majority of sectors. Likewise, the overall trend in the 
number of breached records is positive, and is similarly positive for all but 0500,000,0001,000,000,0001,500,000,0002,000,000,0002,500,000,0003,000,000,0003,500,000,0004,000,000,0004,500,000,0005,000,000,000
0200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,0001,200,0001,400,0001,600,0001,800,000
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Rate of breached records
per 100,000 Internet users 
Breached records per 100,000 US Internet users
Total breached recordsTotal breached records
Figure 7.7
Total counts and rates of number of breached records.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Table 7.2
Aggregate versus disaggregate breach data, 2005– 2016.
Trend direction AggregateFinancial 
servicesOther 
business Retail Education Gov/milHealth 
care Non govern mental
Total breaches Positive Negative Positive Positive Negative Negative Positive Negative
Counts of records Positive Positive Positive Positive Negative Positive Positive Negative
Breached records per 
100,000 US Internet users Positive Negative Positive Positive Negative Negative Positive Negative
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  161
the educational and nonprofit sectors. But as discussed in the previous sec -
tion, counts of compromised records are deceptive and are best normalized 
around the changing size of the Internet ecosystem. Doing so with a crude 
measure of the number of US- based Internet users taken from World Bank 
Indicators (a proxy for the extent of digitization) still produces a positive 
overall trend in the rate of breached records. The disaggregate story is radi -
cally different, however. Now, four of the seven categories exhibit a nega -
tive trend in the breached records rate per one hundred thousand Internet 
users from 2005 to 2016.
The point is that the level of aggregation in the data can decidedly affect 
the view that you get. Further disaggregation within each sector would 
likely review additional nuances. Grouping firms on the basis of their level 
of information security sophistication would be even more revealing. These 
results are also not confined to data breaches in which some semblance of 
sufficiently disaggregated data allow an illustration of the problem. In fact, 
this problem of Simpson’s Paradox, or aggregation bias, emerges whenever 
three simple conditions hold (Jardine 2017):
• The online population can be divided into groups.
• Some of these groups are more vulnerable than others.
• Each group’s rate of growth mirrors its vulnerability, with the most sus -
ceptible group growing the fastest.
To phrase these conditions a bit differently, if groups of online users or 
devices can be rank ordered in terms of vulnerability and the most vulner -
able groups grow faster than the less vulnerable groups, then extensive sim -
ulation results in both normal and power- law- distributed settings indicate 
that aggregate trends will show a worsening situation, even as the disaggre -
gate results all show security improving (Jardine 2017). The massive growth 
rate of highly vulnerable IoT devices almost ensures that overaggregation 
is affecting cybersecurity statistics today, making things seem worse than 
they really are. More generally, if a get- to- market- first- and- do- security- later 
attitude characterizes the future ethos of technology expansion (as it has in 
the past), then Simpson’s Paradox is likely to be a persistent issue for cyber -
security metrics. Aggregate trend data, in other words, that fail to take into 
account the changing composition of the Internet are likely to be biased, 
because the focus on the forest misses all the trees.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025162 E. Jardine
Conclusions for Policy and Research
This chapter advances a simple idea. While cybersecurity researchers are 
highly attuned to some discrete changes in the Internet ecosystem (shifting 
malware variants, for example), many of our current metrics tend to miss the 
forest for the trees by ignoring the very real measurement implications of an 
ever- changing online world. In this chapter, I show that a failure to recognize 
these fundamental shifts in the metrics we use can produce measurement 
bias in two ways: via a lack of normalization and through overaggregation.
Drawing on some of my past research (Jardine 2015, 2018), I have shown 
here how using a count measure to express insecurity introduces bias in 
year- over- year trends by failing to grapple with the simple fact that a grow -
ing Internet should have more malicious activity. Instead, I argue that 
cybersecurity researchers need to adopt an age- old method from the ana -
logue world and start normalizing cybercrime statistics around the growing 
Internet. The Anti- Phishing Working Group, whose phishing website data 
I present here, could usefully begin normalizing its counts to great effect—  
assuming a good measure of an agreed- on denominator could be found.
Of course, the most effective denominator for each measure of insecu -
rity is still an open question. The number of Internet users offers a sim -
ple generic measure that will suffice in many cases. Yet in some discrete 
instances, such as zero- day exploits, a better denominator might be either 
lines of code (if we knew that number) or computer programs. Zero- day 
exploits in the code of mobile applications, for example, could be normal -
ized around the total number of mobile applications to produce a better 
measure than just a count of vulnerabilities. For phishing websites, the popu -
lation of domains, search traffic, or websites might work best in other cases, 
as discussed earlier.
I also show that more attention needs to be paid to the changing face 
of the Internet ecosystem in the process of devising cybersecurity metrics 
and collecting and analyzing data. Overly aggregate measures can point in 
one direction, while disaggregated numbers can show another story alto -
gether. This phenomenon of Simpson’s Paradox is quite general and likely 
holds whenever groups have different levels of vulnerability and growth 
rates (Jardine 2017). Data breach data from the United States exemplifies 
the potential problem. On the basis of total counts of breached records, for 
example, a policy maker, regulator, or corporate C- suite executive might 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  163
decide that more needs to be done to improve cybersecurity. But the dis -
aggregate trend in that firm’s sector might show an improving scenario, 
suggesting that current measures and levels of investment are sufficient. All 
policies and investments have opportunity costs. Missing out by spending 
too much on security can reduce the usability of services and forgo other, 
potentially more beneficial activities.
The results of this analysis are important for both policy makers (broadly 
defined) and Internet governance researchers.
For policy makers, the results of the analysis suggest that current cyber -
security trends might be misleading. While more and better data would 
be needed to say for sure, the results presented earlier often indicate an 
improvement, rather than worsening, of the state of cybersecurity in both 
phishing websites and US- based data breaches across many discrete sectors 
of the economy. Data ideally inform public policy development, as bad 
policy can cause a host of unintended consequences and waste resources 
countering problems that are only partially real. Good policy follows only 
from good metrics, however, and this chapter proposes two discrete ways 
in which stakeholders, such as governments, computer security incident 
response teams, and security vendors, can collect more meaningful data.
For researchers, the analysis speaks to a few practices that ought to be 
adopted during data collection and analysis: normalize counts and, as much 
as possible, disaggregate data to control for potential so- called lurking con -
founders that give rise to Simpson’s Paradox. Beyond that, the research 
prescriptions also speak to many of the core themes of this research compen -
dium volume. Proprietary or closed systems, for example, diminish the trans -
parency of collected data. Such a lack of transparency makes assessing data 
quality more difficult, but it also makes research- initiated corrections diffi -
cult to do after the fact. Large (big) data— an increasingly common feature of 
today’s online environment— are potentially a boon, since they can include 
sufficient information to properly normalize incident counts and disaggre -
gate trends to sufficiently fine- grained levels. Last, growing market concen -
tration and increasing technical complexity are persistent trends online that 
directly affect cybersecurity risk (Geer, Jardine, and Leverett 2020) and prom -
ise to continue the constant ebb and flow of the scale and composition of 
the Internet ecosystem in a way that will, undoubtedly, affect cybersecurity 
measures. Researchers need to be ever vigilant to ongoing changes online, as 
good policy and research requires good measures and data.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025164 E. Jardine
Notes
1. The Ponemon Institute studies are published the year after the year in which the 
data are collected. For example, the data in the 2016 report is typically for 2015.
2. The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse draws a distinction between a breached record 
involving financial data and records involving nonsensitive material such as emails. 
I use the total number of records here. These breaches are also only in deliberately 
malicious attacks (not from accidental disclosures or in unknown attacks) and with 
a known target.
3. In a power- law probability distribution, the smaller the alpha, the more pro -
nounced the instability in the mean (see Neumann 2015).
4. The per 100 and per 1,000,000 designators are used to make the figure intelli -
gible. They have no material effect on the analysis.
References
Anderson, R., Barton, C., Bohme, R., Clayton, R., van Eeten, M. J. G., Levi, M., Moore, 
T., & Savage, S. (2012). Measuring the cost of cybercrime . WEIS 2012. Retrieved from 
http:// www . econinfosec . org / archive / weis2012 / papers / Anderson_WEIS2012 . pdf
Anderson, R., Bohme, R., Clayton, R., & Moore, T. (2008). Security economics and Euro -
pean policy . The Workshop on the Economics of Information Security, WEIS 2008. 
Retrieved from http:// www . econinfosec . org / archive / weis2008 / papers / MooreSecurity  
. pdf
Anderson, R., & Moore, T. (2006). The economics of information security. Science, 
314, 610– 613. Retrieved from http:// tylermoore . ens . utulsa . edu / science - econ . pdf
Anti- Phishing Working Group. (2008– 2016). Phishing attack trends reports . Retrieved 
from http:// www . antiphishing . org / resources / apwg - reports /
Bradshaw, S., DeNardis, L., Hampson, F. O., Jardine, E., & Raymond, M. (2015). The 
emergence of contention in global Internet governance . Global Commission on Internet 
Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 17). Centre for International Governance Inno -
vation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org / sites / default  
/ files / no17 . pdf
Brecht, M., & Nowey, T. (2013). A closer look at information security costs. In 
R. Böhme (Ed.), The economics of information security and privacy . Berlin, Germany: 
Spring Science & Business Media.
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) & McAfee. 2014. Net losses: 
Estimating the global cost of cybercrime . Centre for Strategic and International Stud -
ies. Retrieved from https:// csis - prod . s3 . amazonaws . com / s3fs - public / legacy_files / files  
/ attachments / 140609_rp_economic_impact_cybercrime_report . pdf
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  165
DeNardis, L., & Raymond, M. (2017). The Internet of Things as a global policy fron -
tier. UC Davis Law Review, 51 (2), 475– 497.
Edwards, B., Hofmeyr, S., & Forrest, S. (2016). Hype and heavy tails: A closer look at 
data breaches. Journal of Cybersecurity, 2 (1), 3– 14. Retrieved from https:// doi . org / 10  
. 1093 / cybsec / tyw003
Florêncio, D., & Herley, C. (2013). Sex, lies and cyber- crime surveys. In B. Schneier (Ed.), 
Economics of information security and privacy III  (pp. 35– 53). New York, NY: Springer. 
Retrieved from https:// link . springer . com / chapter / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4614 - 1981 - 5_3
Gartner Research. (2015). Gartner says 6.4 billion connected “things” will be in use in 2016, 
up 30 percent from 2015 . Retrieved from http:// www . gartner . com / newsroom / id / 3165317
Geer, D., Jardine, E., & Leverett, E. (2020). On Market Concentration and Cybersecu -
rity Risk. Journal of Cyber Policy, 5 (1).
Hampson, F., & Jardine, E. (2016). Look who’s watching: Surveillance, treachery, and trust 
online . Waterloo, Canada: Centre for International Governance Innovation Press.
Herley, C., & Flor êncio, D. (2009). A profitless endeavor: Phishing as tragedy of the 
commons. NSPW ’08 proceedings of the 2008 New Security Paradigms Workshop  (pp. 
59– 70). Retrieved from http:// dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id =1595686
HP. (2017). HP study reveals 70 percent of Internet of Things devices vulnerable to attack . 
Retrieved from http:// www8 . hp . com / us / en / hp - news / press - release . html ? id =1744676  
#  . WSMGKmjysuU
Index of Cybersecurity. (2020). Retrieved from https:// wp . nyu . edu / awm1 /
Internet World Stats. (2017). Internet usage statistics: The Internet big picture . Retrieved 
from https:// www . internetworldstats . com / stats . htm
Jardine, E. (2015). Global cyberspace is safer than you think: Real trends in cybercrime . 
Global Commission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 16). Centre for 
International Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www  
. cigionline . org / sites / default / files / no16_web_0 . pdf
Jardine, E. (2017). Sometimes three rights really do make a wrong: Measuring cybersecurity 
and Simpson’s paradox . Paper presented at the 16th Workshop on the Economics of 
Information Security, WEIS 2017. Retrieved from http:// weis2017 . econinfosec . org  
/ wp - content / uploads / sites / 3 / 2017 / 05 / WEIS_2017_paper_18 . pdf
Jardine, E. (2018). Mind the denominator: Towards a better measurement system for 
cybersecurity. Journal of Cyber Policy, 3 (1), 116– 139.
Juniper Research. (2015). Cybercrime will cost businesses over $2 trillion by 2019 . 
Retrieved from https:// www . juniperresearch . com / press / press - releases / cybercrime  
- cost - businesses - over - 2trillion
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025166 E. Jardine
Kaspersky Labs. (2008). Kaspersky security bulletin 2008 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 36241 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - statistics - 2008 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2009). Kaspersky security bulletin 2009 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 36284 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - 2009 - statistics - 2009 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2010). Kaspersky security bulletin 2010 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 36345 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - 2010 - statistics - 2010 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2011). Kaspersky security bulletin 2011 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 36344 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - statistics - 2011 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2012). Kaspersky security bulletin 2012 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 36703 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - 2012 - the - overall - statistics - for - 2012 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2013). Kaspersky security bulletin 2013 . Retrieved from http:// media  
. kaspersky . com / pdf / ksb_2013_en . pdf
Kaspersky Labs. (2014). Kaspersky security bulletin 2014 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / files / 2014 / 12 / Kaspersky - Security - Bulletin - 2014 - EN . pdf
Kaspersky Labs. (2015). Kaspersky security bulletin 2015 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 73038 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - 2015 - overall - statistics - for - 2015 /
Kaspersky Labs. (2016). Kaspersky security bulletin 2016 . Retrieved from https://  
securelist . com / analysis / kaspersky - security - bulletin / 72771 / kaspersky - security  
- bulletin - 2016 - predictions /
Kshetri, N. (2006). The simple economics of cybercrimes. IEEE: Security & Privacy, 
4(1), 33– 39.
Laube, S., & B öhme, R. (2016). The economics of mandatory security breach report -
ing to authorities. Journal of Cybersecurity, 2 (1), 29– 41.
Meeker, M. (2017). Internet trends, 2017— code conference. Kleiner Perkins . Retrieved 
from http:// dq756f9pzlyr3 . cloudfront . net / file / Internet +Trends +2017 +Report . pdf
Morgan, S. (2016). Hackerpocalypse: A cybercrime revelation. Cybersecurity Ventures . 
Retrieved from https:// www . herjavecgroup . com / hackerpocalypse - cybercrime - report /   
Neumann, J. (2015). Power laws in venture. Reaction Wheel . Retrieved from http://  
reactionwheel . net / 2015 / 06 / power - laws - in - venture . html
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Taking the Growth of the Internet Seriously When Measuring Cybersecurity  167
Ponemon Institute. (2013). 2013 cost of data breach study: Global analysis . Retrieved 
from https:// www . ponemon . org / local / upload / file / 2013%20Report%20GLOBAL%20
CODB%20FINAL%205 - 2 . pdf
Ponemon Institute. (2014). 2014 cost of data breach study: Global analysis . Retrieved 
from https:// www - 935 . ibm . com / services / multimedia / SEL03027USEN_Poneman_2014  
_Cost_of_Data_Breach_Study . pdf
Ponemon Institute. (2015). 2015 cost of data breach study: Global analysis . Retrieved 
from https:// nhlearningsolutions . com / Portals / 0 / Documents / 2015 - Cost - of - Data - Breach  
- Study . PDF
Ponemon Institute. (2016). 2016 cost of data breach study: Global analysis . Retrieved 
from https:// www . ibm . com / downloads / cas / 7VMK5DV6
Ponemon Institute. (2017). 2017 cost of data breach study: Global overview . Retrieved 
from https:// www . ibm . com / downloads / cas / ZYKLN2E3
Ponemon Institute. (2018). 2018 cost of data breach study: A global overview . Retrieved 
from https:// www . ibm . com / downloads / cas / AEJYBPWA  
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (2020). Data breaches. Retrieved from https:// privacyrights  
. org / data - breaches
Roberts, D. (2016). Tom Ridge: Cyber attacks are now worse than physical attacks. 
Yahoo! Finance . Retrieved from http:// finance . yahoo . com / news / tom - ridge - cybersecurity  
- attacks - are - now - worse - than - physical - attacks - 170426390 . html ? soc_src =social - sh 
& soc_trk =tw
Rogers, E. M. (2010), Diffusion of innovations . New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Simpson, E. H. (1951). The interpretation of interaction in contingency tables. Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 13 (2). 238– 241.
Statista. (2020). Internet of Things (IoT) connected devices installed base worldwide 
from 2015 to 2025. Retrieved from https:// www . statista . com / statistics / 471264 / iot  
- number - of - connected - devices - worldwide /
Symantec. (2013). 2013 Internet security threat report . Retrieved from http:// www  
. symantec . com / content / en / us / enterprise / other_resources / b - istr_main_report  
_v18_2012_21291018 . en - us . pdf
Symantec. (2014). 2014 Internet security threat report . Retrieved from http:// www  
. symantec . com / content / en / us / enterprise / other_resources / b - istr_main_report  
_v19_21291018 . en - us . pdf
Symantec. (2015). 2015 Internet security threat report . Retrieved from https:// www  
. symantec . com / content / en / us / enterprise / other_resources / 21347933_GA_RPT - inter net  
- security - threat - report - volume - 20 - 2015 . pdf
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025168 E. Jardine
Symantec. (2016). 2016 Internet security threat report . Retrieved from https:// www  
. symantec . com / security - center / threat - report
Taleb, N. (2010). The black swam: The impact of the highly improbable . New York, NY: 
Random House Trade Paperbacks.
van Eeten, M. J. (2017). Patching security governance: An empirical view of emergent 
governance mechanisms for cybersecurity. Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, 
19(6), 429– 448.
Woods, D., Moore, T., & Simpson, A. (2019, June). The county fair cyber loss distribu -
tion: Drawing inferences from insurance prices . Paper presented at the 18th Workshop 
on the Economics of Information Security, WEIS 2019, Boston, MA. Retrieved from 
https:// www . researchgate . net / publication / 332861796_The_County_Fair_Cyber  
_Loss_Distribution_Drawing_Inferences_from_Insurance_Prices
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025This chapter reflects on methodological lessons learned from doing empiri -
cal research on Google and Facebook as part of a research project conducted 
2015– 2017 on the commercialized public sphere (Jørgensen 2017, 2018; Jør -
gensen and Desai 2017). The project set out to explore how the two com -
panies frame human rights such as freedom of expression and privacy in 
relation to their platforms; how this framing is reflected at governance level 
(e.g., content regulation), contractual level (e.g., terms of service), and tech -
nical level (e.g., default settings); and the human rights implications of these 
practices. My motivation for researching these questions was twofold. First, 
the companies are increasingly powerful and effectively influence the bound -
aries for how billions of users may exercise human rights such as the right 
to privacy and freedom of expression. The human rights impacts of their 
practices may arise in a number of situations and decisions related to how 
the companies respond to requests from the government to restrict content 
or access user information; how they adopt and enforce terms of service; the 
design and engineering choices that implicate security and privacy; and deci -
sions to provide or terminate services in a particular market (Kaye 2016, para. 
11). Second, researchers have little insight into the norms and narratives that 
shape these companies’ practices. As emphasized by platform scholarship 
(Ananny and Gillespie 2016), these systems, people, and values are too often 
out of reach of scholars whose job is “to make explicit, orderly, consistent—  
and open to critical analysis— these ‘orientations’ that are usually taken for 
granted by empirical researchers” (Calhoun 1995, 5).
The research draws on a science and technology studies approach, high -
lighting how the design and implementation of any particular technology 
are patterned by a range of social, political, and economic factors (Williams 8 Researching Technology Elites: Lessons Learned from 
Data Collection at Google and Facebook
Rikke Frank Jørgensen
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025170 R. F. Jørgensen
1996)— for example, how a particular economic interest patterns the pri -
vacy features that a platform offers (see also Musiani’s science and technol -
ogy studies approach to Internet governance in chapter 4). My analytical 
vantage point has been to think of discourses— or what Mansell (2013) and 
Flichy (2007) call imaginaries— as an integral part of understanding these 
specific platforms. Similarly to a paradigm, much of the knowledge gener -
ated by a discourse comes to form common sense (Edwards 1997, 40). It 
is a “background of assumptions and agreements about how reality is to 
be interpreted and expressed, supported by paradigmatic metaphors, tech -
niques, and technologies and potentially embodied in social institutions” 
(34). A discourse continually expands its own scope, occupying and inte -
grating conceptual space in a kind of discursive imperialism. Presuming 
that discourses shape social practices and expectations, unpacking people’s 
way of framing and ascribing meaning to specific issues may help us under -
stand and confront their common sense, underlying assumptions, and met -
aphorical point of reference (Jørgensen 2013, 6). In short, discursive frames 
are used to situate events, fashion a shared understanding of the world, and 
guide problem- solving (Barnett and Finnemore 2004, 33). Engaging with 
representations such as connecting the world, building social infrastructure, 
organizing the world’s information, and making information universally 
accessible can help unpack the relationship between a technology and its 
embedded norms and values, as well as illuminate how a particular framing 
benefits certain interests and downplays others (see also Hofmann’s take on 
discourse analysis in relation to Internet governance and multistakehold -
erism in chapter 12). In explaining why particular frames are promoted 
over others, the project relies on an actor- oriented perspective (Long 2001), 
emphasizing the agency of company staff and their meaning making, moti -
vations, and strategies. This implies attention to how individuals explain 
particular meanings and how these meanings are translated into practice.
In terms of data collection, I have relied on a context- oriented qualita -
tive approach, using interviews and online material as key sources of data 
(Huberman and Miles 1994). I collected data via interviews with Google 
and Facebook staff members (primarily in Europe and the United States), 
as well as via publicly available material, including public presentations by 
company staff. To retain some level of privacy for interviewees, while quali -
fying the findings to the widest extent possible, I identify them by affiliation 
but not by name.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  171
In the following, I use the research case to discuss challenges pertain -
ing to this type of policy- engaged qualitative research, focusing on getting 
access  to staff within the organizations, the interview situation  itself, and the 
data analysis . While the case and its analysis relate specifically to Google 
and Facebook, the chapter raises broader issues on concepts, methods, and 
frameworks for conducting Internet governance research. In the conclud -
ing section, I draw out some of the lessons learned and relate these observa -
tions to Internet governance as a research field.
Getting Access
Gaining access to interlocutors within Facebook and Google proved to be 
a major challenge in relation to the data collection. Whereas both com -
panies had initially— via staff based in Denmark— agreed to participate in 
the research project, the subsequent process of locating people willing to 
talk about human rights turned out to be very difficult. Practical obstacles 
varied from lack of publicly available contact details to lack of response to 
emails. Neither company, for example, has contact details of staff listed on 
the company websites. In contrast, many of the employees can be found 
via LinkedIn Pro, which proved to be a useful tool to locate staff within a 
given area of the organizations. Once staff were identified and contacted, 
a subsequent challenge related to the difficulty of finding informants will -
ing to share their observations, beyond the designated spokesperson within 
either organization. In practice, I would continually be referred to a selected 
point of contact when I tried to contact staff with different expertise across 
the organization. Although I explained that gathering different perspec -
tives across the organization was a point in itself, staff would insist that the 
identified spokesperson would be the best person to answer my questions. 
Eventually, I almost gave up on interviewing people and considered basing 
the analysis solely on publicly available statements such as the Zuckerberg 
archive,1 combined with the relatively large amount of publicly available 
presentations, interviews, and so on from Google and Facebook founders 
and policy staff. Instead, I decided to revise my data collection strategy and 
focus on spaces where the two companies were present, such as Internet 
policy meetings (e.g., the Internet Governance Forum, EU meetings related 
to Internet governance) and more specific industry or research events (e.g., 
Global Network Initiative Public Learning Forum, Google Developer Groups 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025172 R. F. Jørgensen
meetings). This proved to be a good strategy, both as a means of establish -
ing follow- up contact and in terms of engaging in discussion outside the 
more formal interview setting. I realized that when I made personal con -
tact with Google and Facebook staff— for example, at a public meeting—  
they would often be more willing to be interviewed subsequently. Another 
useful strategy was to talk to local organizations that had some level of 
cooperation with the companies and were willing to introduce me to spe -
cific staff members. In sum, gaining access to interview subjects within the 
companies required an extensive amount of work compared with previous 
data collection I have been involved in— for example, among activists, civil 
society organizations, and government officials.
The Interview Situation
Interviewing elites posed methodological challenges to the empirical data 
collection. In addition to general interview considerations such as assessing 
the appropriate length of an interview, gaining the trust of respondents, 
dealing with respondents not answering questions, and closed-  versus open-  
ended questions (Kvale 1997), specific issues relate to interviewing elites. 
The literature covering these methodological challenges has grown (Dexter 
1970; Harvey 2011; Mikecz 2012). The methodological issues in elite inter -
viewing involve issues of both validity (How appropriate is the interview 
format to the task at hand? Will the interviewer gain valid data?) and reli -
ability (How consistent are the results?) (Berry 2002). Elites are often more 
likely to attempt to control the interview and be more particular about the 
questions they are willing to answer than other interview subjects (Harvey 
2011, 439). This prompts researchers to consider how they present them -
selves and to show that they have done their homework because often 
elites might consciously or unconsciously challenge them on their subject 
and its relevance (Zuckerman 1972).
I conducted approximately 20 interviews with staff from Google and 
Facebook as part of my data collection. The interviews were via face- to- face 
meetings or done remotely via Blue Jeans (Facebook) or Google Hangouts 
(Google). I also visited the US and international (Dublin) headquarters of 
both companies, both for interviews and to attend meetings. Most of the 
respondents were staff members with responsibility for public policy, pri -
vacy, community operations (Facebook), and removal requests (Google). 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  173
However, I also conducted interviews with technical staff (Google) and 
staff working on education and user experience (Google). Two aspects of 
the interviews proved especially challenging: The first was how to han -
dle an interview in which the topic is sensitive, the interview situation is 
restricted, and the respondents are cautious on what type of information 
they convey. In the second, challenges related to teasing out the implicit 
sensemaking and taken- for- granted context that effectively shape the fram -
ing and governance of human rights, such as the right to privacy and free -
dom of expression, within the two companies.
In relation to the first set of challenges— the constrained interview— I 
tried to leverage my own expertise in the field and to create an atmosphere 
of peer- based conversation rather than interview per se. Because of my pre -
vious work on Internet rights and freedoms (Jørgensen 2013) and because 
access to respondents had proved so difficult to obtain, I was very aware that 
the topic of my research was politically sensitive within both organizations. 
As an illustration of this, none of the respondents would allow me to record 
the interview, which meant that I had to rely on extensive note- taking dur -
ing the conversations. Writing notes during the interview had the disad -
vantage of drawing attention away from the interview, limited eye contact 
between the interviewer (me) and the interviewee, and at times made it dif -
ficult to ensure that the interview stayed on track. However, note-  taking also 
has some advantages compared with recording. While typed notes provide a 
weaker description of the interview, they potentially provide more detailed 
off- the- record information (Byron 1993). In other words, while recording 
provides a detailed record of the interview, it may result in less information 
being conveyed because it limits the respondents’ willingness to talk. In 
contrast to previous research that has found note- taking to encourage more 
frank and detailed responses (Dexter 2006), I did not find the responses 
to be significantly richer than recorded answers to similar topics I have 
found in the public domain (e.g., recorded panel discussions or question 
and answer sessions). I did find, however, that note- taking during the inter -
view forced me to focus on key messages and to document those messages 
instantly.
To facilitate a trustful and open atmosphere, I would start each interview 
by explicitly addressing an existing controversy— between, for example, 
privacy advocates and Facebook— and outline how my research hoped to 
engage with these existing debates. My intent was to demonstrate solid 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025174 R. F. Jørgensen
knowledge on the topic and a contextual and political understanding of 
the issues. In many cases, this would generate a more open and friendly 
tone; however, my general sense was that the interviewees were extremely 
guarded and synchronized in their responses, and it proved difficult to get 
respondents to elaborate more broadly on company practices and policy 
development. While research indicates that the interviewer can use silences 
to create a tension that may lead to more detailed answers (Berry 2002), 
I was generally trying to keep the conversation going. Given the sensitivity 
of the topics, I was afraid long silences would contribute to an awkward 
atmosphere and thus make the respondents less likely to elaborate on their 
answers.
Elites generally dislike closed- ended questions, which confine them to 
a restricted set of answers: “Elites especially— but other highly educated 
people as well— do not like being put in the straightjacket of close- ended 
questions. They prefer to articulate their views, explaining why they think 
what they think” (Aberbach and Rockman 2002, 64). While I took note of 
this in my interview style, I was also aware that I often had limited time to 
speak with the respondents and therefore a structured approach was nec -
essary to obtain a focused response in a short time frame. Consequently, 
I conducted most interviews in a semistructured form using interview 
guides that reflected the key themes of my research. The semistructured 
format allowed improvisation and following subjects that appeared during 
the interview, including issues that were not part of the interview guide. 
Similarly, some areas were relevant to some respondents but not to oth -
ers; hence, the thematic structure I followed varied. Despite the cautious 
approach toward staff interviews that both companies had demonstrated, 
some respondents were surprisingly generous with their time and would 
allow up to 90 minutes for an interview. In general, the face- to- face inter -
views lasted considerably longer than the interviews conducted remotely.
Although I experimented with relatively open- ended questions, the 
answers were in most cases fairly short and seemed standardized. However, 
there were also respondents who did not follow this pattern and would go 
into longer elaborations on a topic. In some cases, the respondents would 
advertently or inadvertently not answer a question. In these circumstances, 
I would rephrase and ask again. If they still did not answer the question, 
I would continue my line of questions and then circle back to the original 
question later in the interview. While this circling- back approach proved 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  175
useful in some interviews, that was more the exception than the rule. Argu -
ably, staff working with public policy within either organization are accus -
tomed to dealing with policy makers, media, civil society, and so on and 
are very conscious of how they respond to politically sensitive questions.
When I compared the data collected via interviews with the publicly 
available presentations— for example, on content moderation practices— I 
found that the narratives and examples used were almost identical. In other 
words, after having listened to a few public talks on a given topic (e.g., 
transparency reporting) I could anticipate how a question related to that 
topic would probably be answered by one of my respondents. Irrespective 
of whether the topic concerned the core company values (e.g., the impor -
tance of free speech and privacy), the approach toward human rights (e.g., 
the description of corporate safeguards against government overreach), or 
governance challenges (e.g., content removal mechanisms), the responses 
were closely aligned across the people I talked to and even across the two 
companies for themes common to both organizations. In terms of corpo -
rate culture, it is interesting that storytelling is so uniform around what the 
company is doing and why it is doing it, in particular the role that technol -
ogy is seen to play in making the world a better place (see later discussion). 
In terms of critical self- reflection, my experience was that when I referred 
to a given company policy that had been criticized (e.g., Facebook’s Free 
Basics or Google’s merger of its privacy policies), it was often presented as a 
factual misunderstanding, thus something that could be remedied by more 
information on what the company was actually doing. Few of the respon -
dents were willing to reflect substantively on criticism— for example, from 
researchers or civil society organizations— of a specific practice.
The second set of challenges relate to identifying the implicit sensemak -
ing and taken- for- granted context that inform the human right narratives 
within the two companies. Respondents seemed cautious and guarded 
when talking about corporate practices and human rights, yet it became 
clear to me after a couple of interviews that they shared an interpretative 
frame that governed their understanding of the relationship between the 
company and the framework of international human rights law. To tease 
out this frame, and to make it more explicit, I would first take note of the 
vocabulary and metaphors staff used to talk about specific human rights 
issues. I noted, for example, that the respondents repeatedly highlighted 
the liberating and transformative role of technology and thus of technology 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025176 R. F. Jørgensen
companies in making the world a better place. “We believe that, if more 
people are connected, the world will be more successful economically and 
socially” (#4, Facebook 2015). “What we do will help make the world a bet -
ter place” (#3, Google 2015). Both the Facebook narrative (giving all indi -
viduals the ability to share and connect) and the Google narrative (making 
all the world’s information accessible) seem deeply rooted in a belief sys -
tem of doing good for society. Moreover, there is a strong narrative around 
human rights threats posed by either repressive  or controlling  (regulating) 
governments. “Our main focus is to minimize harms from governments” 
(#7, Google 2015). In terms of repressive governments, the respondents 
would refer to countries such as China, Russia, Iran, Turkey, and Egypt that 
are known for Internet censorship (Clark et al. 2017), whereas they would 
say controlling governments were those European countries seen as pater -
nalistic with regard to data protection regulation.
To validate the interpretative frame I had drawn from the interviews, 
I would refer to it in follow- up questions or in the last part of the interview. 
I would ask, for example, if it was correct to note that governments are 
perceived as the primary threat to the protection of human rights online, 
and I would continue by asking about the institutional mechanisms estab -
lished to counter governmental overreach. I fine- tuned my interpreta -
tion on the basis of the responses and added nuance to the description 
of the corporate storytelling. For example, my respondents all emphasized 
privacy as an important norm; however, I realized that the respondents 
referred to a very specific understanding of user privacy. I therefore went 
through several questions asking staff more explicitly what privacy pro -
tection at Google and Facebook entailed, and I found that it refers solely 
to user empowerment  and user control  while using the products and not to 
data minimization, which is core to data protection regulation and thus to 
online privacy protection in Europe. Whereas reference to data minimiza -
tion would challenge the underlying logic of the online business model 
based on data maximization, the framing of privacy as user control may be 
accommodated through various privacy settings, as well as improved user 
information. In short, the extensive data collection that the data- driven 
business model relies on is an inherent element in the interpretative frame 
in both organizations. The business model functions as a taken- for- granted 
context and is seen as an integral and essential component in providing a 
“free” service (Jørgensen 2017).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  177
Analysis
The third and final theme relates to the data analysis, specifically how to 
identify and describe the core human rights narratives and their reflection 
at the technical, legal, and governance levels. For theme analysis, I used a 
combination of meaning condensation and narrative structuring (Thagaard 
2004, 158– 163). I searched for theme- related points in the interview notes 
and tried to identify persistent explanations across the data collected.
The analysis revealed that public policy staff at Facebook and Google are 
aware of, and refer to, the international framework of human rights law 
and practice. When staff were elaborating on the role of the company vis- à- 
vis human rights, there was a very persistent narrative around state- caused 
threats to the free flow of information, invasive behavior from repres -
sive states, skepticism toward state regulation of company practices (e.g., 
detailed data protection regulation), and a strong belief in self- regulatory 
measures. Although there are certainly cultural differences between the two 
companies, they both seem guided by a strong belief in the power of tech -
nology and in finding technical solutions to complex societal problems 
such as power inequality and uneven access to information. Generally, the 
interviewees shared a belief that their products contribute positively to 
social and economic development and thus to the enjoyment of human 
rights for everyone.
When trying to detect in more detail the nature of the human rights 
commitment expressed by staff at both companies, subthemes emerged. 
First, there was a strong emphasis on the state- centric nature of human 
rights violations, focusing almost entirely on user harms caused by states. 
While it is true that human rights law holds no direct obligations for pri -
vate actors, this does not imply that private actors do not cause human rights 
harm. On the contrary, there is an increasing recognition of the potential 
negative effect on human rights from private actors and a call on companies 
to mitigate it (Knox 2012). In fact, several soft law standards provide guid -
ance to companies on their responsibility to respect human rights.2 When 
questioned about their human rights responsibility, some of the respon -
dents referred to the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, 
which represent the most recent soft law standard in this domain (UN 
Human Rights Council 2011). The guiding principles reaffirm states’ obliga -
tion to ensure that businesses under their jurisdiction respect human rights 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025178 R. F. Jørgensen
but also outline the human rights responsibility of business, independent 
of how states implement their human rights obligations. Anchored in the 
UN “Protect, Respect, and Remedy” framework, the principles establish a 
widely accepted vocabulary for understanding the respective human rights 
roles and responsibilities of states and business. None of the respondents, 
however, mentioned that the UN Guiding Principles assert a global respon -
sibility for businesses to avoid causing or contributing to adverse human 
rights impacts through their own activities and to address such impacts 
whenever they occur.
Second, the state- centric narrative was informed by several cases in which 
states had tried to assist technology companies in censorship, shutdowns, or 
surveillance. This is not surprising, as the ability of states to compel action 
by technology companies has been the source of some of the most wide -
spread and severe human rights violations facilitated by the technology sec -
tor (Sullivan, 2016). In response, several of the major Internet companies 
cofounded the Global Network Initiative (GNI) in 2009. In the interviews, 
the GNI was mentioned time and again as a platform for multistakeholder 
engagement and as a sector- specific example of developing standards and 
guidance on how to respond to— and mitigate— overreach by states. The 
benchmarks and guidance produced by the GNI confirm the state- centric 
framing and thus is a narrative in which governments make more or less 
legitimate requests and companies respond and push back against such 
requests. With the increasing power that technology giants such as Google 
and Facebook hold in the online ecosystem and the standard setting pro -
vided by the UN Guiding Principles, this take on the human rights responsi -
bility of companies is far too narrow. Arguably, there is a rising expectation 
from scholars and civil society organizations that the companies not only 
safeguard their users from overreach by states but also assess and mitigate 
negative human rights impact caused by their own business practices.
Third, safeguarding user content from state overreach was spoken of as a 
freedom of expression issue; however, the state- centric narrative effectively 
meant that the companies’ enforcement of self- defined boundaries for 
allowed content ranging from clearly illegal to distasteful— and anything 
in between— was not identified as a human rights issue (Jørgensen 2018). 
Whereas state requests for takedowns rested on some level of transpar -
ency, terms of service enforcement appeared largely invisible and guarded 
from any kind of public scrutiny. Likewise, for privacy, employees at both 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  179
Facebook and Google emphasize that they pay great attention to privacy 
and push back against government requests for user data with due diligence 
standards. As an example of the commitment to privacy, both companies 
mention that an extensive system is in place to detect and react to privacy 
problems whenever a new product or product revision is introduced. In 
contrast, the underlying collection and use of personal data is not framed 
as a privacy issue. Privacy is repeatedly addressed as user control within the 
platform and not as limits to data collection per se. The idea of personal 
data as the economic asset of the Internet economy is presented as a given, 
and there is no recognition that the business model may, at a more funda -
mental level, preclude individual control. Thus, both companies praise the 
Internet’s emancipatory potential and their role in facilitating this poten -
tial worldwide while not acknowledging that the infrastructure and services 
they control are key to people’s ability (or inability) to exercise their rights. 
The strong belief in the liberating power of technology echoes the US online 
freedom narrative (Morozov 2011), which largely focuses on threats to the 
free and open Internet from repressive governments. It pays limited atten -
tion to the fact that rights such as freedom of expression, freedom of infor -
mation, freedom of association, and so forth, are being exercised on private 
platforms— and thus the boundaries and modalities for these rights and 
freedoms are set by companies and outside the direct reach of human rights 
law. Moreover, that users’ social interactions on the platforms are directly 
linked to revenue reinforces the imbalance between these companies and 
their users. Since I finalized the research, these issues have only increased 
on the public agenda, and data scandals such as that of Cambridge Analyt -
ica have prompted policy makers in Europe and the United States to discuss 
options for regulating the business practices of technology giants such as 
Google and Facebook. In 2018, the UN special rapporteur on freedom of 
expression dedicated an entire report to examining how states’ and social 
media companies’ regulation of user- generated content may affect freedom 
of expression (Kaye 2018). As part of the report, the rapporteur proposes a 
framework for content regulation based on human rights law.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I will examine how the human rights framework relates to 
and informs the broader field of Internet governance research.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025180 R. F. Jørgensen
First, the human rights framework is increasingly used by the compa -
nies that govern Internet infrastructure and services, not only major Inter -
net platforms but also companies and corporations in the domain name 
system— as pointed to by Braman in chapter 2 and Musiani in chapter 4. 
Gatherings of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN), for example, have had several sessions related to how ICANN 
understands and operationalizes its human rights commitment— at ICANN, 
registry, and registrar levels.3 The increasing attention to the human rights 
framework in the technology sector is also demonstrated at the annual 
RightsCon summit,4 which brings together companies, policy makers, and 
civil society groups from around the globe to discuss the intersection between 
technology use and regulation and the human rights implications of these 
practices.
Second, the increasing uptake of the human rights discourse in the 
technology sector contributes to defining public expectations and thus has 
policy implications. The narratives at Facebook and Google situate human 
rights issues firmly within a free market discourse in which companies pro -
vide products to users and are allied in protecting their users against repres -
sive governments. This framing iterates the power of the free market and 
users’ ability to choose between different products while not recognizing 
the negative impact that these platforms may have on users’ rights. Essen -
tially, it makes a difference whether Facebook is framed as an important 
part of the public sphere and public debate, with attached obligations, or 
whether it is seen as merely one product among many competing products 
in a free market. Likewise, for Google. Does it provide a social infrastructure 
whose governance has a direct impact on its users’ ability to exercise rights 
and freedoms, or is it merely one among many search engines that users 
may or may not choose to use? The competing framings are important in 
understanding the conflicting expectations and their implications for the 
protection of rights within these spaces. While it is important that the tech -
nology sector address its human rights responsibility, its discourse and prac -
tice need to acknowledge that human rights impact assessment, mitigation, 
and due diligence must include all business processes and not only those 
involving state intervention.5 The attention to the information and com -
munication technologies sector by the UN special rapporteur on freedom of 
expression, David Kaye, is an important step in this direction (Kaye 2016). 
In short, we should be attentive to the risk of private companies capturing 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  181
the human rights discourse without truly acknowledging that they them -
selves are powerful and potentially rights- violating actors in the ecosystem 
of human rights protection.
Third, the corporate uptake of the human rights discourse may divert 
attention away from the legal obligations of states to ensure that the rights 
of users are protected in the realm of private actors. In other words, states 
breach their human rights obligations both when abuse can be attributed 
to them and when they fail to take appropriate steps to prevent, investi -
gate, punish, and redress private actors’ abuse (UN Human Rights Council 
2011). It is important to keep in mind that human rights law set out to pro -
tect the individual from abuse by power, and thus address a power imbal -
ance, therefore there will be conflicting interests involved in human rights 
protection. A discourse that fails to acknowledge the conflict between, for 
example, users’ right to privacy and a business model based on harvesting 
user data have not seriously dealt with the human rights impact of com -
pany practices. Likewise, if the discourse fails to recognize the potential 
conflict between standards for freedom of expression and terms of service 
enforcement, that effectively influences the boundaries for allowed speech 
for billions of users.
Finally, while there is a need to critically engage with private actors on 
their human rights impact and responsibility, one must be realistic about 
the enormous economic interests vested in a specific framing and thus 
about what can be achieved in terms of dialogue and voluntary commit -
ment. In addition, it is important to recognize that while there are essen -
tially different discourses on these topics inside and outside the companies, 
there are increasing cooperation and streams of funding from technol -
ogy companies toward advocacy, policy, and research in this area. In this 
increasingly blurred landscape, it is important to distinguish and critically 
address both the legal obligations of states and the soft law responsibility 
of companies to assess and mitigate all business practices that may have 
a negative impact on human rights. As stressed by DeNardis in chapter 1, 
Internet governance covers “complex and multivariable points of control” 
that can be used to advance fundamental rights and freedoms or harm 
them. With this in mind, the blurred landscape of multistakeholderism and 
public- private corporations that surround the Internet governance domain 
poses specific challenges for conducting Internet governance research. It is 
thus crucially important that the researcher can interrogate, navigate, and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025182 R. F. Jørgensen
study her field while retaining full integrity as a researcher. While this is a 
well- known challenge in many fields of research, it calls for hypercritical 
awareness in a field where the stakes are so high in terms of both economic 
and societal interests.
Notes
1. The Zuckerberg archive contains all public talks by Mark Zuckerberg in the period 
2004 to 2019. Available at https:// www . zuckerbergfiles . org /   .
2. See OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises , available at http:// mneguidelines  
. oecd . org / text /  , and ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work , 
available at http:// www . ilo . org / declaration / lang -  - en / index . htm  .
3. See, for example, WS2— Enhancing ICANN Accountability , available at https://  
community . icann . org / display / WEIA / Human +Rights , and NCSG- ICANN and Human 
Rights , available at https:// meetings . icann . org / en / marrakech55 / schedule / mon - ncsg  
- human - rights  .
4. See the RightsCon Costa Rica 2020 website, https:// www . rightscon . org /   .
5. See G ötzmann 2019 for a comprehensive overview of the state- of- the- art of 
human rights impact assessment in the global business context, including sector-  
specific case studies.
References
Aberbach, J., & Rockman, B. (2002). Conducting and coding elite interviews. PS: 
Political Science and Politics, 35 (4), 673– 676.
Ananny, M., & Gillespie, T. (2016, October 22– 23). Public platforms: Beyond the cycle 
of shocks and exceptions . Paper presented at the meeting of Internet, Policy and Poli -
tics conference. Oxford Internet Institute, Oxford, UK.
Barnett, M. N., & Finnemore, M. (2004). Rules for the world: International organizations 
in global politics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Berry, J. (2002). Validity and reliability in elite interviewing. PS: Political Science and 
Politics, 35 (4), 679– 682.
Byron, M. (1993). Using audio- visual aids in geography research: Questions of access 
and responsibility. Area, 25 (4), 379– 385.
Calhoun, C. (1995). Critical social theory: Culture, history, and the challenge of differ -
ence. Cambridge, MA: Wiley- Blackwell.
Clark, J., Faris, R., Morrison- Westphal, R., Noman, H., Tilton, C., & Zittrain, J. 
(2017). The shifting landscape of global Internet censorship . Berkman Klein Center for 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Researching Technology Elites  183
Internet & Society Research Publications. Retrieved from http:// nrs . harvard . edu / urn  
- 3:HUL . InstRepos:33084425
Dexter, L. A. (1970). Elite and specialized interviewing . Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
Dexter, L. A. (2006). Elite and specialized interviewing . Colchester, UK: European Con -
sortium for Political Research.
Edwards, P. N. (1997). The closed world: Computers and the politics of discourse in Cold 
War America . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flichy, P. (2007). The Internet imaginaire . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Götzmann, N. (Ed.). (2019). Handbook on human rights impact assessment . Chelten -
ham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Harvey, W. S. (2011). Strategies for conducting elite interviews. Qualitative Research, 
11(4), 431– 441.
Huberman, A. M., & Miles, M. B. (1994). Data management and analysis methods. 
In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research  (pp. 428– 444). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Jørgensen, R. F. (2013). Framing the net: The Internet and human rights . Cheltenham, 
UK: Edward Elgar.
Jørgensen, R. F. (2017). What platforms mean when they talk about human rights.  
Policy & Internet, 9 (3), 280– 296.
Jørgensen, R. F. (2018). Framing human rights: Exploring storytelling within Inter -
net companies. Information, Communication & Society, 21 (3), 340– 355.
Jørgensen, R. F., & Desai, T. (2017). Privacy meets online platforms: Exploring pri -
vacy complaints against Facebook and Google. Nordic Journal of Human Rights, 35 (2), 
1– 21.
Kaye, D. (2016, May 11). Report of the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection 
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression . Geneva, Switzerland: Human Rights 
Council.
Kaye, D. (2018, April 6). Report of the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection 
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression . Geneva, Switzerland: Human Rights 
Council.
Knox, J. H. (2012). The Ruggie rules: Applying human rights law to corporations. In 
R. Mares (Ed.), The UN guiding principles on business and human rights: Foundations and 
implementation  (pp. 51– 83). Leiden, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Kvale, S. (1997). Interview: An introduction to the qualitative research interview . Copen -
hagen, Denmark: Hans Reitzels Forlag.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025184 R. F. Jørgensen
Long, N. (2001). Development sociology: Actor perspectives . London, UK: Routledge.
Mansell, R. (2013). Imagining the Internet: Communication, innovation, and governance . 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Mikecz, R. (2012). Interviewing elites: Addressing methodological issues. Qualitative 
Inquiry, 18 (6), 482– 493.
Morozov, E. (2011). The net delusion: The dark side of Internet freedom . New York, NY: 
PublicAffairs.
Sullivan, D. (2016, June). Business and digital rights: Taking stock of the UN guiding principles 
for business and human rights . Association for Progressive Communications Issue Papers. 
Retrieved from https:// www . apc . org / sites / default / files / BusinessAndDigitalRights_full  
_report . pdf
UN Human Rights Council. (2011, March 21). Guiding principles on business and 
human rights: Implementing the United Nations “protect, respect and remedy” frame -
work. Report of the special representative John Ruggie. New York, NY: Author.
Williams, R., & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. Research Policy, 
25(6), 865– 899.
Zuckerman, H. (1972). Interviewing an ultra- elite. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 
36(2), 159– 175.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Since the late 1990s, Internet governance has been a critical topic for mul -
tidisciplinary academic research (Bygrave and Bing 2009; Cogburn 2003, 
2005; Cogburn et al. 2005; DeNardis 2009; Goldsmith 2007; Mueller 2009, 
2010; Par é 2003; Thierer and Crews 2003). One simple measure of the 
increasing interest in Internet governance research is Google Trends sta -
tistics. In figure 9.1 we see November 2005 as the height of popularity for 
web searches of “Internet governance.” This was the final month leading 
up to the second phase of the World Summit on the Information Soci -
ety (WSIS), held November 16– 18, 2005, in Tunis, after which the United 
Nations Internet Governance Forum (IGF) was launched (Cogburn 2017). 
Internet governance was certainly important before WSIS, but this global 
meeting helped accelerate a broad, multistakeholder focus on the issues 
beyond the narrow technical and academic focus that had dominated the 
study of Internet governance since the mid- 1990s (Cogburn 2017). In chap -
ter 3, Mueller and Badiei highlight these same trends.
In some ways research on the narrower Internet governance domain of 
cybersecurity has eclipsed the broader study of Internet governance. During 
the same time period, 2004– 2017, there was a steady rise in searches for the 
term “cybersecurity,” with a relatively sharp increase starting in 2013 (figure 
9.2). Many researchers turned to a focus on better understanding the politi -
cal and strategic implications of decisions made by infrastructure providers 
(Musiani et al. 2016). This rise is correlated with a steady increase in actual 
cybersecurity attacks, including the March 2007 hack of TJX, parent com -
pany of T. J. Maxx (Pepitone 2014), the June 2010 Stuxnet attack against 
Iran’s nuclear centrifuges (Kushner 2013), the November 2013 Target (Kassner 
2015), September 2014 Home Depot (Vinton 2014), and the April and June 9 Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet 
Governance Research: Computational Analysis of Transcripts 
from 12 Years of the Internet Governance Forum
Derrick L. Cogburn
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025186 D. L. Cogburn
02550Interest over time75100
January 1,
2004
March 2007
TJX HackApril 1,
2008July 1,
2012
June
2013
Snowden
RevelationsApril/June 2015
OPM Hacks
September
2014
Home
Depot HackJune 2010
Stuxnet HackOctober 1,
2016
November
2013
Target Hack
Figure 9.2
Google Trends searches for “cybersecurity,” 2004– 2017.0255075100
January 1,
2004Interest over time
December 1,
2008November 1,
2013November
2005
WSIS TunisJanuary 1,
2017
Figure 9.1
Google Trends searches for “Internet governance,” 2004– 2017.
2015 Office of Personnel Management data breaches (Koerner 2016). This rise 
is also correlated with the revelations by Edward Snowden of US government 
widespread surveillance of the Internet, which began in June 2013 (Green -
wald 2013). It also corresponded with the launch of the 2013 Barack Obama 
administration executive order on cybersecurity (Executive Order No. 13,636, 
2013) and the subsequent National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST 2014) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  187
During the same period, the terms “big data” and “analytics” also became 
much more widespread. Between 2004 and 2012, Google Trends indicates 
search for the term “big data analytics” was relatively flat, with an average 
popularity score of 5. But then it exploded, jumping to 15 in January 2012 
and to a high of 100 in March 2017. Figure 9.3 illustrates this trend. Schnei -
der (2016) highlights some of the potential reasons for these trends, such 
as the increasing use of technologies that produce digital data, including 
unstructured text, and the corresponding increase in computational power 
available to analyze them.
Some describe big data, the Gartner Group being the first, by its 3Vs, or 
the volume, velocity, and variety of data that are available today (Laney 
2001). Some scholars add veracity, variability, and value to those for under -
standing the concept of big data.
A particularly interesting type of data is underutilized: unstructured tex -
tual data. By unstructured, we mean text that has not yet been tagged, 
coded, or organized in some predetermined data model. Schneider (2016) 
estimates that up to 80 percent of the world’s available data is unstructured 
text. The growing digital production and digitization of text adds signifi -
cant amounts of textual data for analysis. This includes text on websites 
and in blog posts, speeches, meeting transcripts, email archives, reports, 
published articles, and especially social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, RSS 
feeds). Twitter is a particularly interesting source of unstructured textual 
data, making “nearly all of its data available via APIs [application program -
ming interfaces] that enables [ sic] realtime programmatic access to its mas -
sive seven- year archive” (Leetaru et al. 2013), and “Twitter users produce 
0255075100Interest over time
January 1,
2004April 1,
2008July 1,
2012October 1,
2016January 1,
 2017
Figure 9.3
Google Trends searches for “big data analytics,” 2004– 2017.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025188 D. L. Cogburn
8 billion words— every single day” (Kaisler et al. 2014). Of course, each of 
these data sources has “structure,” but it is considered unstructured data 
because it has not yet been organized into a predetermined data model 
(e.g., into a spreadsheet with columns and rows).
In addition, each of these genres of data has its own characteristics that 
can be harnessed to augment analysis (Lee and Myaeng 2002). However, 
these many text- based datasets are not very large in terms of file size. One 
gigabyte of storage, an extremely small and common amount carried around 
by most students and faculty these days, can contain over 894,784 pages of 
plain text. A terabyte of data can contain 916,259,689 pages of plain text. 
It would take most humans an inordinately long time to read that many 
pages, but the data could be easily carried around on the average external 
drive. The big data of most social scientists or economists, however, espe -
cially those exploiting text as their data source, are not at the scale of the big 
data of earthquake engineering and upper atmospheric research. Thus, the 
“big” in “big data” is a relative term, with its meaning changing according to 
domain and the infrastructure available to the researcher. There is no singu -
larly accepted definition of big data.
This increasing availability of data is coupled with a corresponding 
increase in computational tools, storage, and big data analytics and text 
mining software, including both commercial and open source options. The 
combination of this infrastructure and the available data allows us to com -
bine insights from both quantitative and qualitative big data, but especially 
from unstructured textual data sources.
Purpose
This chapter, first, examines the substantive issues related to one of the 
major global institutional venues for debating issues related to Internet 
governance, specifically the annual UN IGF. Thus, this chapter focuses on 
identifying core themes and key issues discussed over the 12-year history 
of the IGF, and understanding which issues have remained constant, which 
have changed, and when they emerged or changed. Given the increasing 
importance of cybersecurity research in Internet governance, this chapter 
also explores the extent to which cybersecurity issues were debated at the 
IGF and the relationship between the NIST cybersecurity framework intro -
duced by the Obama administration and related IGF debates. Second, the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  189
chapter demonstrates the potential of big data analytics and text mining 
techniques in Internet governance research.
These inductive and deductive text mining techniques are powerful 
tools to exploit the voluminous textual data available to Internet gover -
nance researchers and are also extremely useful for current research inter -
ests related to computational propaganda, or “fake news,” and state-  and 
nonstate- actor influences on national electoral systems through social media 
and other communication platforms. In chapter 7, Jardine highlights the 
continued growth of the Internet, including new users and content they 
create. He also argues for the suitability of quantitative methods for sub -
sections of Internet governance research and particularly for cybersecurity 
research. The text mining approaches discussed in this chapter provide a 
nice complement to Jardine’s arguments, by taking a quantitative analyti -
cal approach to analyzing text- based data, which are inherently qualitative. 
My use of a categorization model (dictionary) to measure the extent to 
which the NIST cybersecurity framework was present in the IGF debates 
reinforces his claims. In addition, Mueller and Badiei in chapter 3 discuss 
the widespread availability of materials on specific Internet governance 
institutions, such as the IGF, Internet Engineering Task Force, Internet Cor -
poration for Assigned Names and Numbers, and others. There are many, 
many more, including the email archives, websites, and policy papers of 
transnational nongovernmental organization networks and of groups such 
as the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Transition Committee. This 
chapter illuminates the reasons for analyzing those materials and making 
much better use of the voluminous resources available from these institu -
tions for Internet governance research.
Conceptual Framework: Approaches to Text Mining
Text can contain substantial meaning and value to researchers. There are 
two important dimensions to text: semantics and syntax. Semantics  refers 
to the meaning of words within their surrounding framework. Syntax  is the 
structure of language, how individual words are arranged to make well-  
formed sentences and paragraphs. For decades, qualitative researchers have 
analyzed texts, doing deep and careful reading of relevant documents. As 
these qualitative research projects grew in size and complexity, computer-  
assisted qualitative data analysis software (CAQDAS) was developed to help 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025190 D. L. Cogburn
facilitate this process. While extremely helpful, these CAQDAS tools still 
require researchers to closely read all documents and add codes to the text, 
developed a priori or in vivo while reading the documents.
The field of text mining is highly interdisciplinary and encompasses 
multiple theoretical approaches and methods with one common element—  
unstructured text as input information. Text mining has been aided by the 
widespread availability of machine- readable text. However, advances in the 
field of text mining, aided by concurrent increases in computational power 
and storage, have now accelerated the potential to use these techniques across 
a range of fields (Schneider 2016). With these tools, researchers can take 
unstructured text and transform it into a structured numerical format, based 
on term frequencies, and subsequently apply standard data mining tech -
niques, finally unlocking the vast amount of valuable information in texts.
Many techniques are available to exploit the power and potential of 
big data analytics and text mining in specific research projects, includ -
ing text classification, text clustering, ontology and taxonomy creation, 
document summarization, and latent corpus analysis. In general, there are 
two philosophical approaches to text mining, statistical and natural lan -
guage processing. The statistical approach to text mining takes the “bag of 
words” route. It assumes there is value in the words themselves and does 
not require the analysts to understand the syntax of the words. In contrast, 
the natural language processing approach first tags parts of speech and then 
considers word and sentence structure. This study takes a statistical text 
mining approach, while recognizing the value of the natural language pro -
cess approach.
Statistical text mining has two broad divisions— inductive and deductive, 
each with its own methodologies and techniques. The inductive approach 
asks broad exploratory questions about a large- scale text- based dataset, 
without specific a priori goals. For example, we can ask what key words 
and phrases characterize a dataset and determine what topics, themes, and 
trends exist. We can identify named entities within the dataset, including 
countries, people, organizations, and acronyms. Cross- tabulation deter -
mines how each element changes in relation to other key variables, such as 
date, region, and organizational type.
The deductive approach, in contrast, is confirmatory, allowing us to 
ask specific research questions of the data and to even test hypotheses. We 
can build, adopt, or adapt dictionaries (categorization models) to help us 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  191
explore specific concepts in the dataset and to determine the degree of their 
presence or absence (Bengston and Xu 1995; Deng, Hine, and Sur 2017; 
Rousu et al. 2005). Variants of these models allow sentiment analysis, to 
characterize positive and negative sentiment, or polarity, within the dataset 
(Liu and Zhang 2012). Further, we can use supervised machine learning 
to develop classification models that allow us to predict text with a high 
degree of accuracy (Rousu et al. 2005). Through the use of these induc -
tive and deductive techniques, we can begin to illustrate the tremendous 
potential of computational text mining for Internet governance and cyber -
security research.
Case Study: UN IGF
The WSIS action lines adopted at the end of the 2003 WSIS included 
promoting the continued development of the Internet with its potential 
impact on all aspects of the world (Cogburn 2017; International Telecom -
munication Union, n.d.). The  action lines included four key references to 
Internet and Internet governance, and the 2005 WSIS Tunis Agenda men -
tions the Internet 80 times and Internet governance 30 times. At the con -
clusion of WSIS Tunis, participants adopted the Tunis Agenda, which in 
addition to coordinated implementation of the WSIS action lines, included 
a commitment to establish and support the UN IGF. The IGF was given an 
initial 5- year mandate and was subsequently approved for another 10 years.
The first IGF was held in Athens, Greece, in 2006, immediately after 
the conclusion of WSIS 2005 in Tunisia (Bygrave and Bing 2009). As of 
December 2017, there have been 12 IGFs, the last in Geneva. Going back 
to the first IGF in 2006, transcripts of sessions have been made available to 
the public on the IGF website ( http:// intgovforum . org ), and over time, this 
process has increased and become more comprehensive. For example, in 
2006, only 11 transcripts were made available, while in 2017, as many as 
215 transcripts were made available (table 9.1).
Table 9.1
Number of IGF transcripts by year.
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Total
11 14 14 15 114 61 8 63 138 162 205 215 1,020
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025192 D. L. Cogburn
Research Questions
To demonstrate the computational text mining techniques described 
above, this case study of IGF transcripts asks four broad research questions, 
two inductive and two deductive.
RQ1. What are the key themes, topics, and entities discussed at IGF over its 
lifetime?
RQ2. Which key issues have remained consistent at IGF, and which ones 
have changed?
RQ3. In what ways is the Internet of Things (IoT) represented at IGF?
RQ4. To what extent is the 2014 NIST cybersecurity framework represented 
at IGF?
Methodology
This study is organized using the cross- industry standard process for data min -
ing (CRISP- DM) for text mining.1 Since text mining is still a relatively new and 
somewhat unstandardized field, the CRISP- DM approach can provide a well-  
understood, documented, and somewhat standardized process for executing 
and managing complex text mining projects. The CRISP- DM for text mining 
has six stages through which each text mining project must proceed (figure 
9.4). In Stage 1, the researcher determines the purpose of the text mining 
study: what the researcher wants to accomplish and the problem or opportu -
nity identified by the researcher. In Stage 2 the researcher explores the avail -
ability and nature of the unstructured textual data to exploit. The researcher 
has to determine if the data are available, in what format they are stored, and 
in what quantity. Stage 3 focuses on preparing data, which could include data 
cleaning, preprocessing, applying stopwords (exclusion lists that remove com -
mon, insignificant words), and further data reduction techniques of stemming 
and lemmatization. In Stage 4, the researcher develops the models and specific 
techniques to analyze the data. In Stage 5 the researcher evaluates the results 
of the analysis. In Stage 6 the researcher deploys the results, in the form of rec -
ommendations and presentations. At any point along the way, the researcher 
may decide to go back to a previous stage or all the way to the beginning.
Using an automated commercial tool called SiteSucker,2 the researcher 
collected all the publicly available IGF transcripts. This data collection 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  193
yielded 1,020 documents (made up of .txt, .html, .doc, and .pdf formats), 
in a file of 109.9 megabytes. The data collection represents the available 
transcripts of main sessions and workshops where available.
Once the data were collected, the researcher used a commercial software 
tool called Provalis ProSuite to organize the project and conduct the text min -
ing.3 There are open source software tools that can also perform this type of 
analysis, such as the R programming language and related packages. Most R 
programmers use RStudio, an open source integrated development environ -
ment (IDE), which makes it easy to install and use free and open source text 
mining packages such as tm, Rvest (for data collection), and tidytext. The 
first step is to build the corpus, which includes converting the textual data 
into numerical data, based on the word frequencies across documents. This 
corpus, containing all the available IGF transcripts, is constructed primarily 1. Purpose: 
Determining
the purpose
of the study
2. Data Availability :
Understanding the
nature and availability
of data
3. Data
Preparation: 
Preparation of the
data for the study 4. Models: 
Develop and
assess the
analytical
models5. Evaluate : 
Evaluate the
findings6. Deploy: 
Deploy the
results
Continuous Feedback
and Re-Evaluation
Figure 9.4
The CRISP- DM approach.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025194 D. L. Cogburn
as a document- term- matrix (DTM), which means each document is repre -
sented as a row in the matrix, while each term (word) in each document is 
represented in the columns of the matrix, with a numerical value for how 
many times that term occurs in the document. Upon import, I used the file 
structure (organized by date of the IGF) to automatically create a Date vari -
able for filtering the dataset by date and conducting a longitudinal analysis. I 
also used this Date variable for cross- tabulation analysis. Then, I preprocessed 
the data, applying a typical English- language stopword dictionary (or exclu -
sion list) to remove frequent words that add little value to the analysis (such 
as “a,” “and,” “the”). The exclusion list may be modified for a specific dataset 
(e.g., words deemed important to include or remove in the analysis). I did 
not apply stemming or lemmatization, which preprocesses a textual dataset 
to reduce its overall size.
To answer the first two of the four research questions, I began with an 
inductive approach, a count- based evaluation, that focuses on term and 
document frequency, followed by phrase frequency. This is a common 
approach, and is one of the simplest techniques for text mining, similar to 
basic descriptive analysis of project variables in a statistical study.  A word 
or phrase, an n- gram, occurring frequently in a dataset, with some impor -
tant limitations discussed later, is considered important. In this analysis, 
I used the term frequency by inverse document frequency (TFxIDF) tech -
nique: if a word appears frequently in a document, it is important; but if 
it appears in many documents, it is less important. This is a common text 
mining heuristic to identify important words and phrases in a corpus.
Next, I used an inductive technique called topic modeling, which essen -
tially does exploratory factor analysis on the underlying numerical repre -
sentation of the IGF transcripts to identify factors, which are interpreted as 
topics. However, unlike factor analysis, since the dataset is based on text, 
the software provides a textual suggestion of what the topic seems to repre -
sent. I applied topic modeling on the entire dataset and separately for each 
of the 12 years. In addition, I identified key organizations, countries, acro -
nyms, and people across the entire dataset, and again for each year, using a 
named- entity extraction tool.
To answer the third and fourth research questions, I took a deductive 
approach: hierarchical cluster analysis and categorization modeling (also 
known as dictionary development) to answer the third question on the IoT, 
and categorization modeling to determine the extent to which the 2014 
NIST cybersecurity framework is included in IGF discussions for the fourth.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  195
Hierarchical cluster analysis allows examination of the entire dataset for 
co- occurrences and to assess the themes or topics represented by specific 
clusters, such as a cluster that appears to represent the IoT.
Categorization modeling is an explicitly deductive technique. Essen -
tially, it requires the researcher to develop a semantic representation of 
the concept of interest, and then apply that dictionary to the corpus to 
determine the extent to which that concept is present or absent in the 
text. Dictionary development generally starts with the broadest categories 
within the concept (for example, in sentiment analysis, these top catego -
ries tend to be the binary categories of positive and negative). Then, those 
broadest categories can be further divided into broad subcategories. Once 
the lowest levels of categories and subcategories have been determined, spe -
cific words, phrases, and rules (which allow you to formulate criteria for 
text that includes negations and specifications for proximity of words and 
phrases) can be developed. When any of these elements occur, they accrue 
to the subcategory, which in turn aggregates up to its category. This is a 
very powerful technique to identify the extent to which a specific concept 
the researcher is interested in exploring is either present or absent in the 
dataset. In this study, I developed a categorization model (figure 9.5) start -
ing from the 2014 NIST cybersecurity framework core spreadsheet.4 This 
framework has five primary categories (identify, protect, detect, respond, 
Figure 9.5
Overview of 2014 NIST cybersecurity categorization model.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025196 D. L. Cogburn
and recover) and within each category are multiple subcategories and sub-  
subcategories. All these elements are captured in my categorization model. 
I deployed these categorization models across the entire 12- year period.
Similarly, I could have built another categorization model representing 
the EU Cybersecurity Framework and compared the degree to which each 
framework was represented in the dataset. Or I could have explored the 
dataset to assess the degree to which the priorities of one stakeholder— say, 
the private sector, represented by the group Business Action in Support of 
the Information Society (BASIS) and supported by the International Cham -
ber of Commerce (ICC)— were represented in the dataset relative to, say, 
the statements of the civil society Internet Governance Caucus (IGC). I also 
could have used supervised machine learning to build a classifier to distin -
guish between the content of each stakeholder group and then deployed 
that classifier to assess which stakeholder group had the most influence in 
the IGF processes. It would be a little tricky to do this in the IGF context, 
because there are no concrete outcome documents of an IGF, but I used this 
technique to great effect in an analysis of stakeholder contributions to the 
NetMundial conference (Cogburn 2014).
Research Limitations and Challenges in Text Mining Internet Governance
As far as I know, the corpus of 1,020 IGF transcripts makes this the largest 
study to date of these important data, and these techniques have proved to 
be extremely valuable in studying Internet governance. However, this only 
scratches the surface, and this approach has important limitations. First, 
although the data for this study— transcripts from 12 years of the IGF—  
are tremendously revelatory, they do not cover all the workshops and side 
events associated with an IGF meeting, and they capture only formal state -
ments from IGF sessions. This focus on what Goffman (1959) called “front 
stage” behavior ignores his argument of the importance “back stage” behav -
ior can have on policy debates. Of course, much of the work of the IGF is 
accomplished outside the formal conference structure. Backstage behavior 
occurs during the coffee breaks, lunches, dinners, and the many receptions 
and parties associated with an IGF. Analyzing only the formal language is a 
major limitation of this approach. Also, there is the limitation of this par -
ticular dataset of who said what. It would be tremendously valuable to have 
each statement attributed to a particular actor, who could then be coded in 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  197
a variety of ways (e.g., by multistakeholder sector or by regional, ethnic, or 
gender demographic). However, I would have had to be present for each ses -
sion and have conducted more traditional participant- observation research 
or interviews or focus groups. Finally, most text analytics techniques wrestle 
with understanding syntactic meaning. Sarcasm, euphemism, and double 
entendre, all common in human language, continue to elude many of these 
computational approaches. Nonetheless, while limitations of these text 
mining techniques have no silver bullet, this study demonstrates some of 
their tremendous value in Internet governance research.
Findings
To answer the first research question, What are the key themes, topics, and 
entities discussed at IGF over its lifetime?, I applied TFxIDF to explore, first, 
keywords and then phrases across all 12 years. Figure 9.6 shows the top ten 
themes at IGF represented by keyword frequency, and figure 9.7 shows the 
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000MAGCloudCoalitionCybersecurityIPVChildrenYouthWomenICANNData
FrequencyKeyword
Figure 9.6
Key themes across 12 years of IGF represented by keywords.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025198 D. L. Cogburn
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000Human rights
Civil society
Freedom of expression
Private sector
Young people
Developing countries
Multistakeholder
Capacity building
Law enforcement
United States
Dynamic coalition
Data protection
Latin America
Social media
United Nations
Public policy
Point of view
Net neutrality
Council of Europe
Technical community
FrequencyItems
Figure 9.7
Key themes across 12 years of IGF represented by phrases.
top 20 themes of 12 years of IGF represented by phrase frequency. Then I 
used named- entity extraction techniques to identify all the people refer -
enced in the dataset across 12 years. Figure 9.8 shows the top twenty names 
in the dataset.
To answer the second research question, Which key issues have remained 
consistent at IGF, and which ones have changed?, I explored the changes in 
key themes over the 12 years of IGF by identifying the top 20 themes at the 
beginning (2006; figure 9.9), middle (2011; figure 9.10), and most recently 
(2017; figure 9.11).
Also, when using the entity extraction tools, we identify the most fre -
quently listed organizations, acronyms, countries, and people across all 
12 years of the IGF. Figure 9.12 illustrates the top 25 organizations, acro -
nyms, and countries across 12 years of the IGF. Figure 9.8 represents the 
top twenty names appearing in the IGF transcripts over the 12 years repre -
sented in this dataset.
To answer the third research question, In what ways is the Internet of 
Things (IoT) represented at IGF?, I conducted a cluster analysis across all 
12 years. There were initially 60 clusters identified, representing significant 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  199
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000Ulysse GossetKen CukierDavid Gros sVladimir RadunovicNik Growin gTracy HackshawMarianne Frankl inRobert PepperAnriette Esterhuy senChris Disspa inAvri Dori aNathalie Ducommu nBertrand de la Ch apelleJonathan CharlesLuca BelliMarilyn Cad eOlga CavalliVint CerfAndrea SaksMarkus Kumme r
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.8
Top twenty person names at IGF across 12 years.
02 04 06 08 0 100 120Private sector
Developing countries
Civil society
Information society
Human rights
Capacity building
Freedom of expression
Young people
Digital divide
Domain names
Local content
United States
Internet access
Flow of information
Intellectual property
United Nations
Access to the Internet
Developing world
Developed countries
Open source
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.9
IGF top phrases 2006.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025200 D. L. Cogburn
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200Human rights
Civil society
Fake news
Young people
Data protection
Private sector
Social media
Multistakeholder
Artificial intelligence
United Nations
Capacity building
Law enforcement
Freedom of expression
Developing countries
Big data
Public policy
United States
Latin America
Digital economy
Real time
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.10
IGF top phrases 2011.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200WSIS forumInternet shutdownsOpen dataLocal contentCommunity networksNet neutralityDigital literacyHate speechDigital economyFreedom of expressionDeveloping countriesBig dataCapacity buildingArtificial intelligenceMultistakeholderSocial mediaData protectionYoung peopleFake newsHuman rights
FrequencyItem s
Figure 9.11
IGF top phrases 2017.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  201
thematic groupings. Figure 9.13 illustrates four of those clusters around child 
protection, capacity building, innovation in infrastructure (including broad -
band, mobile, net neutrality, and cloud computing), and smart cities and IoT.
Using the inductive technique of topic modeling to look across all 12 
years of IGF and the middle and most recent IGFs in the dataset, I found  
that freedom of expression and human rights are the most durable and 
consistent topics.  Internationalized domain names and mobile phones 
were taken over in the most recent IGF by fake news and media freedom 
and multistakeholder discussions. Table 9.2 highlights this topic modeling 
across the IGFs.
Finally, to answer the fourth research question, To what extent is the 
2014 NIST cybersecurity framework represented at IGF?, I deployed the cat -
egorization model that captured all the primary categories, subcategories, 
and sub- subcategories of the framework.
These figures show the frequency of keywords later codified in the 2014 
NIST cybersecurity framework when looking at the entire 12- year IGF 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000ICANN
Africa
Europe
ICT
IPv
Brazil
US
Rights
India
Google
Facebook
Civil society
ITU
MAG
China
Mexico
Geneva
Human rights
Asia
English
Kenya
WSIS
UNESCO
Latin America
IOT
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.12
IGF entity extraction over 12 years.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Abuse
Sexual
Child
Images
John
Gender
Women
Men
Violence
Hate
Speech
Children
Parents
Kids
Young
Youth
Education
School
Schools
Students
Literacy
Skills
Training
Program
Access
Infrastructure
Local
Network
Networks
Providers
Service
Services
User
Users
Mobile
Phone
Operators
Applications
Broadband
Connectivity
Rural
Fiber
Cost
Spectrum
Digital
Economy
Economic
Innovation
Technologies
Competition
Market
Regulation
Net
Neutrality
Rating
Billion
Million
India
Percent
Cloud
Computing
Software
Companies
Facebook
Google
Microsoft
Platforms
City
Smart
Devices
IOT
Figure 9.13
Partial illustration of the cluster analysis highlighting four of the 60 clusters.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  203
dataset. Specifically, figures 9.15 and 9.16 allow us to drill down into the 
categorization model to the sub and sub- subcategories. For example, the 
most frequently occurring sub- category is PR.PT- 3 Least Functionality. This 
subcategory corresponds with the overall main category labeled “protect,” 
identified as “PR” in the categorization model. The protect “function” of 
the NIST cybersecurity framework has six categories, once of which is called 
“protective technology” (labeled PR- PT in the categorization model). The 
term “protective technology” refers to how an organization manages protec -
tive technology. As defined by NIST, in this subcategory “technical security 
solutions are managed to ensure the security and resilience of systems and 
assets, consistent with related policies, procedures, and agreements.” Within 
protective technology, the third sub- subcategory (labeled PR- PT- 3 in the cat -
egorization model) refers to the principle of least functionality. As defined 
by NIST, “the principle of least functionality is incorporated by configuring 
systems to provide only essential capabilities.” In order to attempt to detect Table 9.2
Topic modeling over 12 years of the IGF.
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
IPV4- 6 
transitionDNS and IANA Budapest 
conventionHuman rights Cybercrime
Child 
pornographyAccessibility Mobile 
devices/ Wi- FiIDNs IDNs
Enhanced 
cooperationHuman rights Mobile phones Disaster risk
Freedom of 
expressionAccessibility
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Journalist/
bloggersHuman rights Human rights Human rights IANA 
transition
Budapest 
conventionIANA 
transitionNet neutrality Wi- Fi/fiber Cybersecurity
Mobile devices DNS Child abuse Children online Fake news
Human rights CERTs/CSIRTs IANA transition IXPs Human rights
Intellectual 
propertyAccessibility SDGs
IDNs IANA transition
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 20250 100 200 300 400 500 600Protect
Respond
Identify
Detect
Recover
FrequencyItems
Figure 9.14
Distribution of NIST cybersecurity framework primary categories.
05 0 100 150 200 250 300Protective_training
Communications
Access_control
Business_environment
Information_protection
Awareness_and_training
Improvements
Security_continuous_monitoring
Governance
Response_planning
Anomalies_and_events
Asset_management
Data_security
Recovery_improvements
Recovery_planning
Analysis
Communication
Detection_processes
Mitigation
Risk_assessment
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.15
Distribution of NIST cybersecurity framework subcategories.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  205
this level of the NIST cybersecurity framework, this component of the cyber -
security model included words and phrases related to the principle of least 
functionality. Figure 9.16 illustrates the finding that within the 12 years of 
IGF transcripts, the most frequently occurring component of the NIST cyber -
security framework (as represented by this categorization model) is the prin -
ciple of least functionality. Each component and subcomponent of the NIST 
model is represented in this way, with RS.CO- 3, the next most frequently 
occurring concept, representing the response function/category of the frame -
work, and the communication subcategory. The response- communication 
subcategory focuses on response activities that are coordinated with internal 
and external stakeholders (e.g., external support from law enforcement agen -
cies). The third element of the response- communication subcategory, labeled 
RS.CO- 3, is designed to assess the degree to which “information is shared 
consistent with response plans.” In this way, we can take this complex and 
highly detailed government framework and assess the degree to which each 
of its detailed parts is represented in a database of unstructured text.5
05 0 100 150 200 250 300PR.PT-3 Least fun ctionality
RS.CO-3 Information sharing
ID.BE-3 Organiza tional priorities
PR.AC-1 Mana ge cr edentials
RS.CO-4 Stakeholder coordinatio n
PR.AC-4 Access  permi ssion s
PR.IP-6 Data destru ction
PR.AT-3 Third-pa rty stakeholder
RS.IM-2 Strategies update d
PR.AC-5 Networ k integrit y
ID.BE-2 Role in critical inf rastructur e
PR.IP-10 Re sponse plans tested
RS.RP-1 Plan executio n
DE.AE-4 Event impact
ID.GV-2 In fosec role alignmen t
DE.CM-2 Physical mo nitoring
RS.IM-1 Lessons learned
ID.GV-4 Governa nce and risk
DE.CM-1 Network monitoring
RS.CO-2 Event repo rting
Frequenc yItems
Figure 9.16
Distribution of NIST cybersecurity framework sub- subcategories.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025206 D. L. Cogburn
Through the use of this detailed categorization model, we are able to 
estimate the degree to which concepts in the framework are present (or 
absent) in the 12 years of IGF transcripts. As such, we see that in 2014, the 
year the framework was introduced, there was a substantial increase in two 
of the five components: identify and protect. See figure 9.17.
Another way of viewing these data is via a bubble chart. In figure 9.18, 
we see that for these same two categories, identify and protect, of the NIST 050100150200250300350400
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Count
Year
Detect Identif y Protect Recover Respond
Figure 9.17
Year- by- year line chart distribution of NIST cybersecurity framework keywords.
Detect
2008
2010
2011
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Identify
Protect
Recover
Respond
Figure 9.18
Year- by- year bubble chart distribution of NIST cybersecurity framework keywords.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  207
cybersecurity framework there was also an increase after 2014, when the 
first version of the framework was introduced.
Discussion
With this relatively brief analysis, I have identified the key thematic focus 
areas of the IGF over its 12- year lifespan. Even without the expensive 
and time- consuming participant observation most researchers studying 
the IGF would want to use, I identified key trends, patterns, changes in 
foci, and important actors— people— operating in this emblematic Inter -
net governance institution. For example, one of the most surprising find -
ings was how early and prominently disability and accessibility issues were 
included in the IGF. On the basis of topic modeling, we see accessibility 
appearing as a topic as early as 2009; it appears again in 2011 and 2014. 
Given the sensitivity of this analysis, and the difficulty of any term making 
it into the small list of core topics for any given year, this result is striking 
(only human rights [n =7] and the IANA transition [n =4] appeared more 
frequently). This finding is most likely a result of the work of the Dynamic 
Coalition on Accessibility and Disability and its long- term coordinator, 
Andrea Saks. In addition, while our named- entity extraction analysis 
identified the name of Markus Kummer appearing most frequently in the 
dataset, nearly twice as frequently as any other name (which makes sense, 
given that Markus was the head of the IGF secretariat, and a key leader 
of the movement within the UN), the second most frequently occurring 
name is Andrea Saks. Most of the remaining names on the list would be 
immediately recognizable to anyone studying or participating actively in 
the IGF over its lifetime.
I have also shown how, in line with Google Trends, cybersecurity top -
ics have become increasingly important over the lifespan of the IGF, with 
a fairly clear correlation between the introduction of the NIST cybersecu -
rity framework in the United States and these discussions globally at IGF. 
This finding helps to illustrate how a well- defined major power policy 
framework— in this case the US under President Obama— can potentially 
influence global discussions on that issue. My goal in this chapter was not 
to exhaust an analysis of the policy issues at IGF but to demonstrate the 
important role these big data analytics and text mining techniques can play 
in Internet governance research.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025208 D. L. Cogburn
Conclusion and Future Research
This study identified some interesting substantive components of the IGF, 
including the key thematic focus areas over its 12- year lifespan and in a 
year- by- year comparison. In addition, although I have only scratched the 
surface, I believe I have demonstrated the power of big data analytics and 
text mining in Internet governance and cybersecurity research. In this and 
in other work I have tried to highlight the importance and potential impact 
of these techniques in monitoring and evaluating the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals and implementation of the WSIS action lines.
Regarding future research, I have already highlighted some possibili -
ties to pursue in the near term. Some of these will require adding more 
variables to the dataset, including type of gathering (e.g., main session, 
workshop), identifying which dynamic coalition organized the event, and 
finally, identifying the speaker by name or stakeholder grouping. However, 
nearer- term studies will focus on building other categorization models: 
first, to represent different approaches to cybersecurity in order to compare 
the degree to which each framework is represented in the dataset, and then 
to identify, represent, and compare other concepts, such as net neutrality 
and Internet freedom. I also believe exploring the dataset to assess the 
degree to which the priorities of various stakeholders are represented will 
be fruitful.
Notes
1. More information on the CRISP- DM process model (1999) is available at http://  
www . crisp - dm . org /   .
2. See the SiteSucker website at https:// ricks - apps . com / osx / sitesucker / index . htm  .
3. Provalis ProSuite is available at http:// provalisresearch . com /   .
4. Framework V1.1 Core (Excel). NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastruc -
ture Cybersecurity. Available at https:// www . nist . gov / cyberframework / framework  .
5. For more detail, see the NIST cybersecurity framework website: https:// www . nist  
. gov / cyberframework  .
References
Bengston, D. N., & Xu, Z. (1995). Changing national forest values: A content analy -
sis (Research paper NC- 323). St. Paul, MN: US Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  209
Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station. Retrieved from http:// www . nrs . fs  
. fed . us / pubs / rp / rp_nc323 . pdf
Bygrave, L. A., & Bing, J. (Eds.). (2009). Internet governance: Infrastructure and institu -
tions. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press on Demand.
Cogburn, D. L. (2003). Governing global information and communications policy: 
Emergent regime formation and the impact on Africa. Telecommunications Policy, 
27(1– 2), 135– 153.
Cogburn, D. L. (2005). Partners or pawns? The impact of elite decision- making and 
epistemic communities in global information policy on developing countries and 
transnational civil society. Knowledge, Technology & Policy, 18 (2), 52– 82.
Cogburn, D. L. (2014, September 1). Uncovering the conceptual antecedents of the NET -
Mundial Outcome Document on the future of global Internet governance . Paper presented 
at the Annual Symposium of the Global Internet Governance Academic Network 
(GigaNet), Istanbul, Turkey.
Cogburn, D. L. (2017). Transnational advocacy networks in the information society: Part -
ners or pawns?  New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan Springer.
Cogburn, D. L., Mueller, M., McKnight, L., Klein, H., & Mathiason, J. (2005). The US 
role in global Internet governance. IEEE Communications Magazine, 43 (12), 12– 14.
DeNardis, L. (2009). Protocol politics: The globalization of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deng, Q., Hine, M., Ji, S., & Sur, S. (2017, January). Building an environmental sus -
tainability dictionary for the IT industry. In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences . Retrieved from http:// hdl . handle . net / 10125 / 41264
Exec. Order No. 13,636. (2013, February 12). Improving critical infrastructure cybersecu -
rity. Retrieved from https:// obamawhitehouse . archives . gov / the - press - office / 2013 / 02  
/ 12 / executive - order - improving - critical - infrastructure - cybersecurity
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life . New York, NY: Doubleday.
Goldsmith, J. (2007). Who controls the Internet? Illusions of a borderless world. Strate -
gic Direction .
Greenwald, G. (2013, June 6). NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon 
customers daily. The Guardian . Retrieved from https:// www . theguardian . com / world  
/ 2013 / jun / 06 / nsa - phone - records - verizon - court - order
International Telecommunication Union. (n.d.). WSIS Action Lines . Available at 
https:// www . itu . int / net / wsis / stocktaking / help - action - lines . html
Kaisler, S. H., Espinosa, J. A., Armour, F., & Money, W. H. (2014, January). Advanced 
analytics: Issues and challenges in a global environment. In 2014 47th Hawaii Interna -
tional Conference on System Sciences  (pp. 729– 738). Waikoloa, HI: IEEE Computer Society.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025210 D. L. Cogburn
Kassner, M. (2015, February 2). Anatomy of the Target data breach: Missed oppor -
tunities and lessons learned. ZDnet . Retrieved from https:// www . zdnet . com / article  
/ anatomy - of - the - target - data - breach - missed - opportunities - and - lessons - learned /
Koerner, B. I. (2016, October 23). Inside the cyberattack that shocked the US gov -
ernment. Wired . Retrieved from https:// www . wired . com / 2016 / 10 / inside - cyberattack  
- shocked - us - government /
Kushner, D. (2013, February 26). The real story of Stuxnet. IEEE Spectrum . Retrieved 
from https:// spectrum . ieee . org / telecom / security / the - real - story - of - stuxnet
Laney, D. (2001). 3D data management: Controlling data volume, velocity and vari -
ety. META Group Research Note, 6 (70), 1. Retrieved from https:// blogs . gartner . com  
/ doug - laney / files / 2012 / 01 / ad949 - 3D - Data - Management - Controlling - Data - Volume  
- Velocity - and - Variety . pdf
Lee, Y. B., & Myaeng, S. H. (2002, August). Text genre classification with genre-  
revealing and subject- revealing features. In Proceedings of the 25th annual interna -
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval  (pp. 
145– 150). New York, NY: ACM.
Leetaru, K., Wang, S., Cao, G., Padmanabhan, A., & Shook, E. (2013, May). Map -
ping the global Twitter heartbeat: The geography of Twitter. First Monday, 18 (5– 6). 
Retrieved from https:// firstmonday . org / article / view / 4366 / 3654
Liu, B., & Zhang, L. (2012). A survey of opinion mining and sentiment analysis. In 
C. Aggarwal & C. Zhai (Eds.), Mining text data  (pp. 415– 463). Boston, MA: Springer.
Mueller, M. L. (2009). Ruling the root: Internet governance and the taming of cyberspace . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. L. (2010). Networks and states: The global politics of Internet governance . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Musiani, F., Cogburn, D. L., DeNardis, L., & Levinson, N. S. (Eds.). (2016). The turn to 
infrastructure in Internet governance . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST). (2014, February 12). Frame -
work for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity. Retrieved from https:// www  
. nist . gov / system / files / documents / cyberframework / cybersecurity - framework - 021214  
. pdf
Paré, D. J. (2003). Internet governance in transition: Who is the master of this domain?  
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Pepitone, J. (2014, January 12). 5 of the biggest- ever credit card hacks. TJX: 94 mil -
lion. CNN Business . Retrieved from https:// money . cnn . com / gallery / technology  
/ security / 2013 / 12 / 19 / biggest - credit - card - hacks / 3 . html
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Big Data Analytics and Text Mining in Internet Governance Research  211
Rousu, J., Saunders, C., Szedmak, S., & Shawe- Taylor, J. (2005, August). Learning 
hierarchical multi- category text classification models. In Proceedings of the 22nd inter -
national conference on Machine learning  (pp. 744– 751). New York, NY: ACM.
Schneider, C. (2016, May 25). The biggest data challenges that you might not even 
know you have. IBM Watson . Retrieved from https:// www . ibm . com / blogs / watson  
/ 2016 / 05 / biggest - data - challenges - might - not - even - know /
Thierer, A. D., & Crews, C. W. (Eds.). (2003). Who rules the net? Internet governance 
and jurisdiction . Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
Vinton, K. (2014, September 18). With 56 million cards compromised, Home Depot’s 
breach is bigger than Target’s. Forbes . Retrieved from https:// www . forbes . com / sites  
/ katevinton / 2014 / 09 / 18 / with - 56 - million - cards - compromised - home - depots - breach  
- is - bigger - than - targets
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Many aspects of contemporary global data flows, including users’ ability 
to enjoy civil liberties online, are shaped by Internet governance processes 
(DeNardis 2014). Influencing these processes is thus of paramount inter -
est to governments, the industry, and civil society. Engineers and entre -
preneurs, lawyers and bureaucrats, and scientists and advocates engage in 
the development and negotiation of Internet policies and standards in a 
plethora of fora, each characterized by its own specific configurations of 
decision- making processes (Hofmann, Katzenbach, and Gollatz 2016). Such 
a multifaceted scenario results in a wealth of issues, actors, venues, and policy 
processes that are often intertwined in complex ways (Raboy and Pado -
vani 2010). But it is not just a matter of mere technical details. Because 
the “arrangements of technical architecture are arrangements of power” 
(DeNardis 2014, 7), the design of the Internet (Braman 2011) and the asso -
ciated policy making (Mueller 2002) can be understood as “politics by other 
means” (Abbate 1999, 179). This makes the study of technical aspects of the 
Internet and their making, which might otherwise seem solely a matter for 
engineers, of great interest for social scientists.
Whereas the design, functioning, and decisions of various Internet 
governance and standard- setting bodies and the participation of differ -
ent groups have been the topic of several publications (see, among others, 
DeNardis 2009; Mueller 2010; and Musiani 2013), methodological aspects 
for the study of Internet governance have received limited attention (e.g., 
Musiani 2015; Raboy and Padovani 2010). To date, research has relied on 
discursive methods such as qualitative interviewing and document analysis 
(e.g., Hintz and Milan 2009; Musiani et al. 2016; Raboy, Landry, and Shtern 
2010) or participant observation in policy processes and network analysis 
(e.g., Hintz 2010; Mueller 2010; Pavan 2012). More recently, however, new 10 Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through 
Mailing- List Analysis
Niels ten Oever, Stefania Milan, and Davide Beraldo
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025214 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
software enables automatized analysis, allowing a more granular approach 
in the study of discursive practices in Internet governance (e.g., Milan and 
Ten Oever 2017). We argue that software- based tools and methodologies can 
enhance our understanding of Internet governance and standard- setting 
processes, in particular with respect to the study of discourse and discursive 
practices— thus galvanizing this relatively young but swiftly growing field 
of research.
This chapter explores innovative approaches in the study of discourse 
within Internet governance settings. Moving from the observation that 
Internet governance is a “politically contested process of meaning making” 
(McCharty 2011, 90), we ask what other sources of data are available and what 
can they tell us. What methods are best suited to interrogate these data and 
processes? While the study of discourse in general remains a crucial focus 
of Internet governance, we argue that group discussions  in particular are the 
natural sites to explore if we are to study the evolution  of said discourses. In 
particular, mailing- list archives are a precious and surprisingly underexplored 
source of data about discursive and norm change as well as stakeholder con -
flicts and alliances. We contend that only a mixed- methods approach com -
bining computational and interpretative tasks is able to exploit these data 
sources at their best. In addition, we reflect on the potential of this approach 
to elicit strategic and tactical interest groups and belonging of social actors, 
as well as the ethical challenges of this methodological approach. This article 
tackles some existing challenges to Internet governance scholarship, among 
those highlighted by DeNardis in chapter 1. In particular, we believe that 
mailing- list analysis has the potential to contribute to making the invisible 
visible, by shedding light on otherwise backstage  decision- making processes 
and highlighting the inherent power relations. Relatedly, it helps researchers 
navigating conflicting values, by empowering them to map power coalitions, 
surface decisional conflicts, and identify marginalized voices.
The chapter is organized as follows. First, we briefly review existing dis -
ciplinary and methodological approaches in the study of Internet gover -
nance. Second, we define what we mean by “discourse” in the context of 
the study of Internet governance, largely building on sociological accounts. 
Third, we explain why mailing lists are a valuable data source, presenting 
a viable approach to their investigation. We conclude by reflecting on two 
points: the ethical challenges of the study of mailing lists and the affor -
dances of this approach to support “engaged research” (Milan 2010, 856) 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  215
decision- making concerning the present and future of crucial infrastruc -
tures of our times.
Main Approaches in the Study of Internet Governance
Internet governance increasingly resembles a “mosaic” (Dutton and Peltu 
2007), in which relations and issues are knit together. This complex, polycen -
tric ecosystem opens a window on issues of sociopolitical nature that present 
themselves as technical and of technical issues that turn out to be political 
(Scholte 2017b). The mosaic itself represents a sort of complex performance 
(Hofmann 2016) involving a variety of actors— namely, governmental and 
corporate players, the organized civil society, academia, and the so- called 
technical community made up of, among others, engineers and computer 
scientists. A large share of this performance takes place in open bodies, whose 
functioning and decision- making processes are well documented and pub -
licly accessible. A significant amount of activity, however, still takes place 
outside public scrutiny (Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016).
Developing at the intersection of many processes, Internet governance 
lends itself to study from a variety of disciplinary perspectives. Each of 
them brings to the fore specific layers of the mosaic, with implications for 
the phenomenon that is being observed. This section offers a brief overview 
of the many layers that can be fleshed out and the distinct disciplinary per -
spectives that can be adopted when approaching Internet governance as an 
object of study, bearing in mind that research on Internet governance often 
focuses on specific areas or issues, with the risk of “equating the overall 
complexity of the landscape with some of its aspects” (Pavan 2012, xix). 
Here we review the perspective of those studying the technical and logi -
cal layer of the Internet, of those looking at market dynamics subtending 
the development and operation of the Internet, and of those analyzing 
the involvement of governances. We conclude by reviewing the holistic 
approach of science and technology studies (STS).
To start with, Internet governance can be approached from the perspec -
tive of computer science in at least three ways. First, computer science plays 
a vital role in the development of technology supporting the functioning of 
the Internet, such as communication protocols and other methods of order -
ing data and data flows. Notable examples are the global database of regis -
tered domain holders, WHOIS (Request for Comment [RFC] 3912 [Daigle 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025216 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
2004]), and the registration data access protocol (RFC 7482 [Newton and 
Hollenbeck 2015]), the latter expected to replace WHOIS and currently 
being piloted by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Num -
bers (ICANN).1 Far from being just a “plumbing matter” (cf. Musiani 2015), 
these protocols embody distinctive implications of political nature that 
cannot be understood merely from an engineering perspective. WHOIS, 
for example, exposes personally identifiable information such as name and 
home address of the domain holder through a publicly accessible database. 
At the time of designing the database for what was still a tiny network 
compared with today’s Internet, these implications were not taken into 
account. Yet the scope of these protocols is far reaching, as testified by the 
development of Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6) (DeNardis 2009). Second, 
computer science informs the decisions around the adoption and imple -
mentation of technology, because the Internet governance debate heavily 
relies on computational measures, especially when it comes to the (lack 
of) adoption of specific standards, protocols, or technologies such as IPv6 
(Perset 2010) or the suite of Internet security protocols DNSSEC (Domain 
Name System Security extensions; Wang 2016). However, while computer 
science is essential for us to be anchored to the concrete materiality of an 
issue and its implications, it bears the inherent risk of naturalizing tech -
nology, hiding its political implications in the name of the just- because- it- 
works attitude typical of engineering. Third, and of particular interest here, 
computer science contributes to the study of Internet governance by devel -
oping multipurpose computational methods, ranging from Internet traffic 
measurements to methods such as those outlined in this chapter (Benthall 
2015; Doty 2015; Niedermayer et al. 2016). In this respect, the discipline 
largely relies on theoretical and experimental methods— whether the devel -
opment of new hardware, software, communication protocols, algorithms, 
and databases or the measurement of their effectiveness.
Markets are a key driving force behind the Internet and its governance, 
thus we ought to consider also economic factors if we are to fully understand 
its governance arrangements. Since its inception, corporations have played 
a central role in the development of the Internet— for example, serving as 
subcontractors for research institutions and the US Department of Defense, 
which is behind the birth of the Internet as we know it (Frischmann 2001). 
Their importance radically increased after the privatization of the Inter -
net backbone and the decommissioning in 1995 of the National Science 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  217
Foundation Network, a series of US- wide backbone computer networks of 
the early days (Chinoy and Salo 1997; Kahin 1990). This trend accelerated in 
the 1990s when the web made the Internet accessible for less- terminal- savvy 
users. Nowadays, significant levels of market concentration can be observed 
in all layers of the Internet infrastructure (Dolata and Schrape 2018). Research 
into market dynamics has thus accompanied the Internet in all these stages, 
partially because economic policies have played a large role in shaping it 
(Kahn 1994), and partially because the Internet has a significant impact on 
the economy (Guill én and Su árez 2005). In Internet governance, consider -
ations of economic nature come into play in the study of scarce resources such 
as IPv4 addresses (Edelman and Schwarz 2015; Mueller and Kuerbis 2013), 
the costs of Internet access (Chaudhuri, Flamm, and Horrigan 2005; Prieger 
2007), and net neutrality (Greenstein, Peitz, and Valletti 2016; Hahn, Litan, 
and Singer 2007; Jay and Byung- Cheol 2010). However, these macroeconomic 
approaches tend to discount the materiality of Internet infrastructure as well 
its political implications. Moreover, Internet governance is awash with exam -
ples of how relevant decisions may happen outside market mechanisms and 
how control over markets is sometimes pursued via noneconomic means.
Since the early days, when the US government bankrolled the develop -
ment (Kahn 1994) and supported the global vocation of the Internet, govern -
ments have played a significant role in the expansion of the infrastructure. 
If intergovernmental bodies took a leading role in the coordination of earlier 
examples of cross- border communication networks such as the telegraph, 
with the Internet this role has been repeatedly questioned (Chadwick 2006; 
Drake 2000; Mueller 2010). Communication scholars and political scientists 
have explored the rise of new governance bodies and how they reconfigure 
the role of governments (Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016), under -
stood through the conceptual lenses of governance innovation (Epstein 
2013), regime complex (Nye 2014), and complex hegemony (Scholte 2017a). 
Works have postulated that governmental regulation might lead to Internet 
fragmentation (Drake, Cerf, and Kleinw ächter 2016; Mueller 2017). While 
political science, and governance studies and international relations schol -
ars in particular, empowers observers to understand the interactions and 
the power dynamics involved in Internet governance, as well as the persis -
tent role of governments in them, it embodies a number of limitations. To 
name just one, governance is a distributed accomplishment that happens 
not only within governance bodies (Van Eeten and Mueller 2013). Moreover, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025218 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
we cannot understand it as a matter of interaction between only discrete 
entities— be they states, companies, or civil society actors. As we discuss later, 
we have to put into focus also the micro interaction layer of individual and 
small- group participation in decision- making.
Probably the latest addition to the Internet governance tool kit, the dis -
cipline of STS has emerged as a particularly fruitful approach. Adopting 
an STS perspective, scholars have investigated Internet standards as policy 
documents (Braman 2011), innovation in multistakeholder configurations 
(Hofmann 2016; Milan and Ten Oever 2016; Ten Oever 2018), the impact 
of the materiality of infrastructure on the ability of people to exercise their 
human rights (Cath and Floridi 2017), and infrastructure as a locus of polit -
ical control (DeNardis and Musiani 2016). STS- inspired approaches allow 
scholars to weave together both the materially and socially constructed 
aspects of complex socio- technical processes like Internet governance. Espe -
cially through infrastructure ethnography (Bowker et al. 2009; Star 1999) 
and actor network theory (Latour 2005; M üller 2015), STS can capture the 
ordering of reality as brought to life by both human and nonhuman actors, 
as well as the mapping of concrete controversies (Epstein, Katzenbach, and 
Musiani 2016). However, the focus on the actors’ point of view might dis -
tract from the bigger picture, obfuscating the role of deeper structures of 
power and strategic or even deceptive behavior.2
While the perspectives and contributions briefly outlined here might 
appear contiguous yet irremediably apart, we argue that they share a valu -
able interest for the discursive layer of Internet governance. They variably, 
and often indirectly, acknowledge that Internet governance is, as McCharty 
(2011) reminds us, a terrain of political contestation whose object is the 
construction of meaning associated with infrastructure and society at large. 
Following McCharty’s injunction to take discourse seriously, we now look 
at what discourse means in Internet governance.
Discourse and Networks in Internet Governance
Discourse gives shape to and reflects the multiple visions and narratives 
of the Internet as they are developed and advanced by stakeholders. It is 
in discourse and intra-  and intergroup discussion dynamics that meaning 
making, with its contradictory, chaotic nature instilled in human relations 
and histories, becomes visible (see Doolin 2003).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  219
Discourse has been under the spotlight of scholars from disciplines as 
distinct as linguistics, semiotics, and cognitive psychology for as long as 
since the first half of the twentieth century, thus we will not attempt to pro -
vide a comprehensive history of discourse in the sciences. We instead focus 
on two potential approaches derived from sociology, which posit discourse 
as at the core of meaning making by and micro interaction between social 
actors (Melucci 1996) and as something deeply entrenched in the cultures 
and ideas shaping technological innovation (Flichy 2007).
Combining these perspectives, discourse can thus be seen as the main 
vehicle for competing values, ideas, and interests to come into focus and 
play out in multilayered settings by opposed, distinct stakeholders through 
the contestation over different policy options and technical orderings. It 
embodies the micro interaction and the narrative dimensions— in which 
the former includes organizing, mobilization, collaboration, and con -
flict dynamics, while the latter ranges from beliefs and policy priorities 
to the “cultural and symbolic understandings surrounding the Internet” 
(McCharty 2011, 90). Discourse is thus both a vehicle for fostering norm 
and policy change in Internet policy making and a source of legitimation 
for the social actors engaged in the process.
As a set of “practices that systematically form the objects of which they 
speak” (Foucault 1972, 49), discourse can be seen as a locus of power— but 
contrary to Foucault, the constitution of social relations we are interested 
in unfolds at the micro level of interaction rather than the macro level of 
the (historical) social order. As such, discourse is strategically and purposely 
mobilized by distinct actors (see McCharty 2011). We contend that this 
perspective can help us capture the multiple levels of contestation that sur -
round Internet policy making and the way ideas and values diachronic -
ally evolve, often in surprising ways and unintended directions, through 
stakeholder interaction. But how can we map the competing narratives that 
animate, shape, and shake Internet governance arenas? In the next section, 
we delve into the locus par excellence where discourse unfolds in Internet 
governance: mailing lists. Studying interaction in mailing lists, we argue, 
empowers us to investigate qualitatively and quantitatively the discursive 
formation of policy preferences.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025220 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
Mailing- List Analysis with BigBang
A distinctive feature of Internet governance bodies such as ICANN and 
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is their (relative) openness and 
the degree of meticulous documentation of their activities through pub -
lic archives. In most cases, this is not limited to working documents and 
official outputs but extends to conference calls, public meetings, and cross-  
community discussions. Everything is recorded and made available on 
organizational websites for reasons of internal accountability and institu -
tional memory. These archives offer researchers a unique opportunity to 
investigate the premises of otherwise behind- the- scenes decisions with 
broad societal implications, thus adding a layer of what we may call exter -
nal accountability. Besides conference proceedings and documentation, a 
relevant and convenient repository for this purpose is email archives.
Mailing lists constitute a surprisingly underexplored source of data, 
holding precious insights on process but also on feelings, values, relation -
ships, and backstage dynamics. The majority of mailing lists are publicly 
archived, with their archives being publicly accessible to nonmembers of 
the respective mailing lists. While mailing lists appear to have lost momen -
tum, as today discussion between groups of friends and peers mostly 
unfolds on messaging apps or social media platforms, they remain a widely 
used medium in the realm of standards development and other sectors of 
the Internet governance community. They are extensively used for infor -
mal exchange, especially for informal coordination between social actors, 
and all the way to decision- making, thus making the pathway to decision-  
making visible. In other words, mailing lists are the locus where the multiple 
layers that constitute Internet governance sediment and where discourse 
and discursive practices are enacted in group discussions and collaboration.
Mailing lists offer insights on consensus building and decision- making, 
conflict and conflict resolution, evolution of a certain issue area and of 
the language associated with it, group dynamics, power concentration and 
inclusion or exclusion mechanisms, negotiation tactics, and more. At least 
four factors make mailing lists a versatile data source with great potential 
for the study of interactions within the realm of Internet governance:
• Mailing lists are structured. An obvious characteristic of emails is their 
standardized structure: headers make metadata easily parsable (e.g., by 
sender, type of interaction, time stamp), which supports different kinds 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  221
of classification and analysis. Moreover, format standardization facili -
tates analysis across different mailing lists and the reproducibility of 
quantitative analysis.
• Mailing lists are cross- sectional. A variety of stakeholder communities 
engage in discussion— and this all converges and sediments on one or 
more dedicated mailing lists. Researchers can thus study interaction (e.g., 
collaboration, contention, and conflict) between interrelated groups and 
online communities.
• Mailing lists are relational. Data extracted from email archives provide 
information on the evolving relations among actors (e.g., users’ reply 
chains) or groups (e.g., mailing lists’ interlocks), allowing researchers to 
analyze the structural basis of discourse, power relations among actors, 
and intergroup dynamics (through, e.g., network analysis).
• Mailing lists are multidimensional. They support social science methods, 
allowing researchers to circumvent the classical trade- off between scope 
and depth of the analysis. For instance, simple descriptive statistics (e.g., 
trends and rankings) can be enriched with relational data (e.g., inter -
action patterns and user- base overlap), and qualitative textual analysis 
can be complemented with advanced computational techniques (e.g., 
machine learning and big data analysis).
• Mailing lists allow longitudinal analysis. They have been the main 
means for discussing Internet infrastructure and architecture since its 
inception (see RFC 1155 [Rose and McCoghrie 1990], RFC 1211 [Wes -
tine and Postel 1991]). Because the history of mailing lists overlaps with 
the whole history of the Internet, lists enable a historical approach to 
Internet- related issues.
BigBang is a Python- based, open source, free software tool kit used by 
researchers as well as stakeholders in computational and interpretive analy -
sis of mailing lists. At the time of writing, it supports analyzing mailing 
lists from Sourceforge, Mailman, and .mbox files, among the most com -
mon software applications for mailing- list management.3 Compared with 
proprietary tools (such as those featured in chapters 2 and 9), open source 
tools improve verifiability and reproducibility of outcomes and allow more 
flexibility when adapting the software to specific research challenges.
With BigBang, mailing lists can be analyzed through three main lenses: 
descriptive statistics, network analysis, and qualitative and quantitative text 
analysis. Descriptive statistics give us a bird’s- eye view about activities in a 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025222 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
given mailing list or sets of lists. We can track how many mails have been 
sent, in what time span, and by how many users. It also allows us to under -
stand the distribution of the length of conversations, commonly known as 
threads, and the time span in which people were involved in them.
Network analysis of mailing lists reveals patterns of communications, 
their development, and the role senders have in the community. It helps 
in understanding whether certain participants function as a node for the 
dissemination of ideas across mailing lists and communities or whether 
conversations stop when certain actors (or groups of actors) get involved. 
It also shows the centrality of actors and their proximity to other nodes 
and whether early exchanges could, for instance, be indicators of emerging 
relations by reflecting an increase in shared messages over time. Finally, it 
reveals the distribution of individuals and groups (and subgroups) within 
the larger landscape and the connections between them: who talks to 
whom and who are the connectors across distinct stakeholder groups.
With qualitative and quantitative text analysis, we can combine the 
descriptive statistics and network analysis and ask questions with the two, 
moving past a basic question like what are the trending topics in conversa -
tions. It also allows us to analyze the affiliation of participants (Niedermayer 
et al. 2016), which in turn aids investigation of the role of formal and infor -
mal leaders in online communities. The combination of affiliation and formal 
and informal leadership roles helps in analyzing the responses of structured 
groups to specific topics and patterns. Because mailing lists allow text analysis 
one can couple the study of mailing lists with the analysis of other structured 
text, such as contributions to the code repository GitHub, policy documents, 
membership or participation registries, statements of interest, and meeting 
transcripts. This then can be used to investigate how affiliation, gender, RFC 
authorship, or other characteristics relate to levels of participation, the mode 
of participation, patterns in responses, etcetera. Finally, the computational 
analysis of mailing lists can offer pointers for more interpretative approaches 
such as Foucauldian, or critical, discourse analysis.
Like other approaches, quantitative mailing- list analysis in general, and 
BigBang more specifically, comes with some caveats. First, data sources typi -
cally contain biases, are incomplete, or are even systematically flawed (Karpf 
2012), and mailing lists are no exception. Regarding data accuracy, we can -
not but note that some dynamics, such as the presence of passive members, 
are not made visible by interaction in mailing lists, which archive only mails 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  223
that were sent to the list. Furthermore, only those mailing lists whose exis -
tence is known to the researcher can be analyzed— and only if the researcher 
has access to the archives. Some mailing lists do not hold archives; oth -
ers are not public at all or do not allow public subscription. Not all data 
are correctly captured: in our analysis of bulk data from ICANN and IETF 
mailing lists, for example, we have come across emails erroneously dated 
as far back as 1904, and with otherwise obviously wrong timestamps (e.g., 
“32 Jan 2008”)— and these were the ones we were able to identify and filter 
out. Occasionally, mailing- list archives contain spam, which might alter the 
results— but BigBang offers options for filtering spam out of the archives.
Conclusion
In this chapter we explore the added value of mailing- list analysis as a 
venue for investigating micro interaction and narratives in Internet gover -
nance and illustrate the potential of the BigBang tool kit. However, while 
the computerized analysis of interaction in mailing lists represents a fruitful 
venue to study discourse and discursive practices at the micro interaction 
level, there are some ethical considerations researchers need to attend to 
in particular with respect to privacy, anonymity, and consent. Although 
the mailing lists we used for our research are publicly archived, analyz -
ing discourse and discursive practices may, for example, offer additional 
keys to understanding aspects of in- group interaction that might jeopardize 
group activities or dangerously single out certain users. Anonymizing utter -
ances in publicly archived lists is impossible, as a search of public archives 
by third parties would easily reveal the author and other important meta -
data. Consent, then, is hard to obtain from every single participant but 
might be easier to obtain from an organization. Consent might come through 
the terms and conditions that come with mailing- list subscriptions or the 
expectations one might have when participating in a governance forum 
through its official channels, as happened in our research on ICANN and 
IETF lists. At least two questions arise: Is this a sufficient safeguard? What 
about “group privacy” (Taylor, Floridi, and Van der Sloot 2017)? In sum, 
with mailing- list analysis there is no one- size- fits- all ethical approach, and 
researchers can expect to have to make ad hoc considerations with respect 
to the participants’ reasonable expectations in public mailing lists in a 
given sociopolitical context.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025224 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
We conclude by exploring the claim that the study of (Internet) gover -
nance influences governance dynamics and outcomes. As Ziewitz and Pent -
zold put it,
Given the role of governance research in rationalising, justifying and legitimating 
political interventions, methods cannot be viewed as neutral instruments. Inter -
estingly, however, questions of methodology are only rarely discussed in studies 
of Internet governance. Most studies still tend to rely on case studies that are 
largely presented as unproblematic representations of reality, which are not fur -
ther questioned in the course of the analysis. The absence of such methodological 
reflection makes sense in that it contributes to the performativity of governance 
by not inducing the reader to question the text and its authority. (2014, 318)
We believe mailing- list analysis with BigBang can be repurposed as a tool 
for engaged research; that is to say, an approach to inquiry that, without 
departing from systematic, evidence- based social science research, may sup -
port the attempts of advocates to set the agenda of policy makers (Milan 
2010, 856). It can, for example, improve the accountability of actors and 
stakeholder groups engaged in Internet governance and uncover allies and 
alignments on specific policy options and technical orderings, perhaps 
advancing social concerns in the Internet governance landscape.
Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from the European Research Council 
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program (grant agreement No. 639379- DATACTIVE, awarded to Stefania 
Milan as principal investigator; https:// data - activism . net ).
Notes
1. Requests for Comment (RFC) are the output documents of the Internet Engineer -
ing Task Force, the Internet Architecture Board, and the Internet Research Task Force 
pertaining to Internet infrastructure topics (see also Ten Oever and Moriarty 2018).
2. For a more comprehensive discussion of the role of STS, see chapter 3, in which 
Musiani thoroughly analyzes the contribution of STS to the study of Internet 
governance.
3. See the BigBang website at https:// github . com / datactive / bigbang  .
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  225
References
Abbate, J. (1999). Inventing the Internet: Inside technology . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Benthall, S. (2015). Testing generative models of online collaboration with BigBang. 
Proceedings of the 14th Python in Science Conference  (pp. 182– 189). Retrieved from 
https:// conference . scipy . org / proceedings / scipy2015 / sebastian_benthall . html
Bowker, G. C., Baker, K., Millerand, F., & Ribes, D. (2009). Toward information infra -
structure studies: Ways of knowing in a networked environment. In J. Hunsinger, 
L. Klastrup, & M. M. Allen (Eds.), International Handbook of Internet Research  (pp. 97–  
117). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Braman, S. 2011. The framing years: Policy fundamentals in the Internet design pro -
cess, 1969– 1979. The Information Society, 27 (5), 295– 310.
Cath, C., & Floridi, L. (2017). The design of the Internet’s architecture by the Inter -
net Engineering Task Force (IETF) and human rights. Science and Engineering Ethics, 
23(2), 449– 468.
Chadwick, A. (2006). Internet politics: States, citizens, and new communication technolo -
gies. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chaudhuri, A., Flamm, K. S., & Horrigan, J. (2005). An analysis of the determinants 
of Internet access. Telecommunications Policy, 29 (9), 731– 755.
Chinoy, B., & Salo, T. J. (1997, September). Internet exchanges: Policy- driven evolu -
tion. In B. Kahin & J. H. Keller (Eds.), Coordinating the Internet  (pp. 325– 345). Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Daigle, L. (2004). WHOIS protocol specification . RFC 3912. Retrieved from Internet 
Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc3912
DeNardis, L. (2009). Protocol politics: The globalization of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeNardis, L. (2014). The global war for Internet governance . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni -
versity Press.
DeNardis, L., & Musiani. F. (2016). Governance by infrastructure: Introduction. In 
F. Musiani, D. L. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson (Eds.), The turn to infrastruc -
ture in Internet governance  (pp. 3– 21). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dolata, U., & Schrape, J. F. (2018). Collectivity and power on the Internet: A sociological 
perspective . London, UK: Springer.
Doolin, B. (2003). Narratives of change: Discourse, technology and organization. 
Organization, 10 (4), 751– 770.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025226 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
Doty, N. (2015). Reviewing for privacy in Internet and web standard- setting. In Secu-
rity and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2015 IEEE  (pp. 185– 192). San Jose, CA: IEEE.
Drake, W. J. (2000). Rise and decline of the international telecommunications 
regime. In C. Marsden (Ed.), Regulating the global information society  (pp. 124– 177). 
London, UK: Routledge.
Drake, W. J., Cerf, V. G., & Kleinw ächter, W. (2016, January). Internet fragmenta -
tion: An overview. Retrieved from World Economic Forum website: http:// www3  
. weforum . org / docs / WEF_FII_Internet_Fragmentation_An_Overview_2016 . pdf
Dutton, W. H., & Peltu, M. (2007). The emerging Internet governance mosaic: Con -
necting the pieces. SSRN . Retrieved from https:// doi . org / 10 . 3233 / IP - 2007 - 0113
Edelman, B., & Schwarz, M. (2015). Pricing and efficiency in the market for IP 
addresses. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7 (3), 1– 23.
Epstein, D. (2013). The making of institutions of information governance: The case 
of the Internet Governance Forum. Journal of Information Technology, 28 (2), 137– 149.
Epstein, D., Katzenbach, C., & Musiani, F. (2016). Doing Internet governance: 
Practices, controversies, infrastructures, and institutions. Internet Policy Review, 5 (3). 
Retrieved from https:// doi . org / 10 . 14763 / 2016 . 3 . 435
Flichy, P. (2007). The Internet imaginaire . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge . New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Frischmann, B. (2001). Privatization and commercialization of the Internet infra -
structure. Columbia Science & Technology Law Review, 2 , 1– 25.
Greenstein, S., Peitz, M., & Valletti, T. (2016). Net neutrality: A fast lane to under -
standing the trade- offs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30 (2), 127– 150.
Guill én, M. F., & Su árez, S. L. (2005). Explaining the global digital divide: Economic, 
political and sociological drivers of cross- national Internet use. Social Forces, 84 (2), 
681– 708.
Hahn, R. W., Litan, R. E., & Singer, H. J. (2007). The economics of “wireless net 
neutrality.” Journal of Competition Law & Economics, 3 (3), 399– 451.
Hintz, A. (2010). Civil society media and global governance: Intervening into the World 
Summit on the Information Society . Berlin, Germany: LIT Verlag.
Hintz, A., & Milan, S. (2009). At the margins of Internet governance: Grassroots tech 
groups and communication policy. International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics, 
5(1/2), 23– 38.
Hofmann, J. (2016). Multi- stakeholderism in Internet governance: Putting a fiction 
into practice. Journal of Cyber Policy, 1 (1), 29– 49.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  227
Hofmann, J., Katzenbach, C., & Gollatz, K. (2016). Between coordination and regulation: 
Finding the governance in Internet governance. New Media & Society, 19 (2), 1406– 1423.
Jay, P. C., & Byung- Cheol, K. (2010). Net neutrality and investment incentives. The 
RAND Journal of Economics, 41 (3), 446– 471.
Kahin, B. (1990). Commercialization of the Internet: Summary Report . RFC 1192. Retrieved 
from Internet Engineering Task Force website:  https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1192
Kahn, R. E. (1994). The role of government in the evolution of the Internet. Com-
munications of the ACM, 37 (8), 15– 19.
Karpf, D. (2012). Social science research methods in Internet time. Information, Com -
munication & Society, 15 (5), 639– 661.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor- network- theory . 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
McCharty, D. R. (2011). Open networks and the open door: American foreign policy 
and the narration of the Internet. Foreign Policy Analysis, 7 , 89– 111.
Melucci, A. (1996). Challenging codes. Collective action in the information age . Cam -
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Milan, S., & ten Oever, N. (2017). Coding and encoding rights in Internet infrastruc -
ture: Sociotechnical imaginaries and grassroots ordering in Internet governance. 
Internet Policy Review, 6 (1). Retrieved from https:// doi . org / 10 . 14763 / 2017 . 1 . 442
Mueller, M. (2002). Ruling the root: Internet governance and the taming of cyberspace . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. (2010). Networks and states: The global politics of Internet governance . Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. (2017). Will the Internet fragment? Sovereignty, globalization and cyberspace . 
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Mueller, M. L., & Kuerbis, B. (2013). Buying numbers: An empirical analysis of the 
IPv4 number market. In iConference 2013 Proceedings  (pp. 27– 37). Retrieved from 
https:// www . ideals . illinois . edu / handle / 2142 / 36045
Müller, M. (2015). Assemblages and actor- networks: Rethinking socio- material 
power, politics and space. Geography Compass, 9 (1), 27– 41.
Musiani, F. (2013). Nains sans géants. Architecture décentralisée et services Internet . 
Paris, France: Presses de Mines.
Musiani, F. (2015). Practice, plurality, performativity, and plumbing: Internet gov -
ernance research meets science and technology studies. Science, Technology & Human 
Values, 40 (2), 272– 288.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025228 N. ten Oever, S. Milan, and D. Beraldo
Musiani, F., Cogburn, D. L., DeNardis, L., & Levinson, N. S. (2016). The turn to infra -
structure in Internet governance . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Newton, A., & Hollenbeck, S. (2015). Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) query 
format . RFC 7482. Retrieved from Internet Engineering Task Force website: https://  
tools . ietf . org / html / rfc7482
Niedermayer, H., Raumer, D., Schwellnus, N., Cordeiro, E., & Carle, G. (2016). An 
analysis of IETF activities using mailing- lists and social media. In Internet Science , 
218– 230. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Nye, J. S. (2014). The regime complex for managing global cyber activities . Global Com -
mission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 1). Centre for International 
Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline . org  
/ sites / default / files / gcig_paper_no1 . pdf
Pavan, E. (2012). Frames and connections in the governance of global communications: 
A network study of the Internet Governance Forum . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Perset, K. (2010, April). Internet addressing: Measuring deployment of IPV6. 
Retrieved from OECD website: https:// doi . org / 10 . 1787 / 5kmh79zp2t8w - en
Prieger, J. E. (2007). The supply side of the digital divide: Is there equal availability 
in the broadband Internet access market? Economic Inquiry, 41 (2), 346– 363.
Raboy, M., Landry, N., & Shtern, J. (2010). Digital solidarities, communication policy 
and multi- stakeholder global governance . New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Raboy, M., & Padovani, C. (2010). Mapping global media policy: Concepts, frame -
works, methods. Communication, Culture & Critique, 3 (2), 150– 169.
Rose, M., & McCoghrie, K. (1990). Structure and identification of management informa -
tion for TCP/IP- based Internets . RFC 1155. Retrieved from Internet Engineering Task 
Force website: https:// tools . ietf . org / html / rfc1155
Scholte, J. A. (2017a, December). Complex hegemony: The IANA transition in global 
Internet governance . Paper presented at the 12th Annual Symposium of the Global 
Internet Governance Academic Network (GigaNet), Geneva, Switzerland.
Scholte, J. A. (2017b). Polycentrism and democracy in Internet governance. In 
U. Kohl (Ed.), The net and the nation state: Multidisciplinary perspectives on Internet 
governance  (pp. 165– 184). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 3 , 
377– 391.
Taylor, L., Floridi, L., & van der Sloot, B. (Eds.). (2017). Group privacy: New challenges 
of data technologies . London, UK: Springer.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Studying Discourse in Internet Governance through Mailing- List Analysis  229
ten Oever, N. (2018). Productive contestation, civil society, and global governance: 
Human rights as a boundary object in ICANN. Policy & Internet, 11 (1), 37– 60.
ten Oever, N., & Moriarty, K. (Eds.). (2018). The tao of IETF: A novice’s guide to 
the Internet Engineering Task Force. Retrieved from Internet Engineering Task Force 
website: https:// www6 . ietf . org / tao
van Eeten, M. J., & Mueller, M. L. (2013). Where is the governance in Internet gover -
nance? New Media & Society, 15 (5), 720– 736.
Wang, Z. (2016, February). Take up DNSSEC when needed. Retrieved from http://  
arxiv . org / abs / 1602 . 08459 /
Westine, A., & Postel, J. (1991). Problems with the maintenance of large mailing lists . 
RFC 1211. Retrieved from Internet Engineering Task Force website: https:// tools . ietf  
. org / html / rfc1211
Ziewitz, M., & Pentzold, C. (2014). In search of Internet governance: Performing 
order in digitally networked environments. New Media & Society, 16 (2), 306– 322.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Information and communication technologies now pervade, and are criti -
cal to the functioning of, every activity on earth.1 Securing information 
technologies has, as a consequence, become a major public policy issue. 
But how to secure information and communication technologies is deeply 
contested (Deibert 2017). The choices that are made to secure information 
ultimately shape our communications spaces and, by extension, how we 
secure our societies.
Research on information security is, therefore, critical to navigating this 
issue in an informed and systematic way. But what is a problem in informa -
tion security that should be addressed by research in the first place? On first 
consideration it may seem obvious that the security of information systems 
is a technological issue and that eventually, with enough systematic atten -
tion to engineering of information systems, we can settle on a way to secure 
information that achieves consensus.
But approaching information systems through a technical- functional 
lens obscures the politically contested nature of information security as 
well as how research on information security itself is influenced by external 
factors. In this chapter, I outline some of the ways in which information 
security gets defined as a research problem. My aim is to show how politi -
cal, economic, and other factors shape the field of information security, 
including what problems are excluded as much as which are addressed or 
prioritized. After this analysis, it will be clearer how the field of information 
security is constructed as a regime or community of practice and the impli -
cations this shaping has for society and politics writ large (Adler 2008).
In emphasizing these questions, I am not trying to solve technological 
problems that plague information security. Rather, I am asking epistemo -
logical and methodological questions about the constitution of the field 11 The Biases of Information Security Research
Ronald J. Deibert
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025232 R. J. Deibert
of information security as it exists today. As Langdon Winner puts it, “It is 
important to notice not only which decisions are made and how but also 
which decisions never land on the agenda at all; which possibilities are 
relegated to the sphere of non- decisions” (Winner 1993, 369). Answering 
these questions requires studying the past, understanding how the field 
of information security evolved and where it is headed today, including a 
consideration of how political and economic forces shape what counts as 
legitimate areas of inquiry and, as importantly, what does not. In short, it 
requires a sociology of information security knowledge (see Bourdieu 2004; 
Pinch and Bijker 1993).
I conclude with some suggestions on how to make research on infor -
mation security more self- aware, more independent, and more broadly 
interdisciplinary— values that I hope help militate against biases and unques -
tioned assumptions.
The Barriers of Disciplinary Silos
A useful starting point for this inquiry is a reminder that academic fields 
of inquiry are, themselves, social constructions. These fields are made up 
of communities of practice that share common principles, rules, languages, 
methods, and even worldviews. These common traits do not mean that all 
academics within a particular field or discipline think alike. To the contrary, 
academic fields— especially those that are healthy— are typically character -
ized by rigorous debates between competing schools of thought. Notwith -
standing their internal differences, however, disciplines create fences around 
research, commonly referred to as disciplinary silos, which have the effect 
of channeling inquiry into conventions. These conventions are necessary 
adaptations to a complex world, which requires specialization and division 
of labor. The downside of disciplinary silos is that they can encourage myo -
pic thinking while discouraging alternative ways of approaching a topic.
With respect to the field of information security research, the most 
important disciplinary silo is the one separating the computer and engineer -
ing sciences from the social sciences and humanities. Few universities 
today systematically include engineering and computer science curricula 
in the social sciences, and vice versa. These disciplinary divisions are com -
pounded by the growing imbalance between the natural sciences, on the 
one hand, and the social sciences and humanities on the other. Research 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  233
into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) subjects is 
growing, mostly on the basis of economic arguments. STEM subjects are 
considered pathways to employment, innovation, and economic growth, 
while the social sciences and many humanities are increasingly portrayed as 
frivolous and financially unrewarding. Whereas STEM subjects receive the 
majority of government and private sector funding, humanities programs 
are shrinking or being eliminated altogether in absence of equivalent fund -
ing. These trends reinforce existing disciplinary divisions in information 
security research while also privileging technical approaches to informa -
tion security problems over broader political and economic considerations.
To be sure, there are exceptions. There are growing subfields dealing 
with human- computer interaction and user interface design, which draw 
insights and theories from psychology and sociology to better design infor -
mation systems. Many social scientists and humanists use methods that 
rely on computer science techniques for quantitative and qualitative data 
analysis (see chapter 9 by Cogburn and chapter 10 by Ten Oever, Milan, and 
Beraldo). Information studies programs are growing into a self- identified 
iSchool movement in which the academic field of information is envi -
sioned as an interdisciplinary whole. Many iSchools include faculty under -
taking research on topics broadly related to information security, such as 
censorship and surveillance.
Another important exception is the subfield of security economics, 
spearheaded by Cambridge University professor Ross Anderson (n.d.) and 
others. Anderson and his growing cohort of colleagues examine the incen -
tive structures that shape information security practices, particularly within 
software and other technology industries. Since most of the IT sector is self-  
regulated, with competitive dynamics rewarding early innovators, com -
panies have few incentives to invest in protection from the ground up, 
meaning that those responsible for producing information systems pass on 
the costs of security to the end user or other parties. As Anderson (2014) 
explains, “Information economics explain why security is hard: in platform 
races, winners are likely to be those who ignored security to make life easy 
for complementers, such as application developers, and they are then likely 
to use it to lock customers in later rather than just protecting them from 
the bad guys.”
While Anderson’s and his colleagues’ work bridges STEM and the social 
sciences, it is incomplete. Although it incorporates economic theory into an 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025234 R. J. Deibert
analysis of information security outcomes, it does not examine how politi -
cal and economic factors may shape what counts as legitimate research into 
information security in the first place. In other words, it does not extend 
the analysis of positive and negative incentives into critically examining 
and reflecting on why the field privileges certain areas of inquiry and meth -
ods over others, and what that privileging means for how, and in whose 
interests, information is secured.
These examples of interdisciplinarity, while encouraging, are still excep -
tions to strong and well- established conventions. Moreover, there are grow -
ing structural constraints that could bias research in ways that reinforce not 
only those disciplinary conventions but also dominant interests. We turn 
now to an analysis of some of those structural constraints.
Structural Constraints on Information Security
Langdon Winner once wrote that “by noticing which issues are never (or 
seldom) articulated or legitimized, observing which groups are consistently 
excluded from power, one begins to understand the enduring social struc -
tures upon which the most obvious kinds of political power rest” (Winner 
1993, 369). What do we notice when we apply this framework to information 
security? My and my colleagues’ research on targeted digital threats at the 
Citizen Lab provides a compelling example (Citizen Lab 2014). At the Citi -
zen Lab, we have analyzed digital espionage campaigns against civil society 
groups since 2009. Beginning with our contribution to the landmark Track -
ing GhostNet  report (Information Warfare Monitor 2009), and ever since, 
we have documented persistent cyber espionage campaigns targeting civil 
society, human rights defenders, political opposition, journalists, and even 
health scientists. Our conclusion is that the same threat actors— typically 
government agencies or nonstate actors working on behalf of states— use 
the same tactics, techniques, and procedures against civil society that they 
use in espionage campaigns against private sector and government targets. 
However, civil society typically lacks the resources, support, and capacity 
to deal with the threat. Defending against digital espionage, from investi -
gation to ongoing remediation, can involve huge investments in money, 
time, equipment, and personnel that few civil society groups can afford.
Compounding the problem, civil society is not a lucrative client for the 
multibillion- dollar cybersecurity threat industry. As a consequence, even 
though private firms may identify civil society targeting in their monitoring 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  235
data, there are few fiscal incentives for these companies to follow up and 
even some potential risks in doing so. While their reporting may list gen -
eralized nongovernmental organization (NGO) or civil society targets and 
victims, those are rarely analyzed in depth. Instead, the reports principally 
aim to highlight industry and government targets and victims, which are 
more attractive sources of revenue. These industry reports can then per -
petuate misguided assumptions about the actual scope and scale of infor -
mation security problems, about who is targeted in digital espionage, and 
why (Maschmeyer, Deibert, and Lindsay 2019; see also Jardine’s chapter 7 
for other biases in cybersecurity datasets introduced by the private sector).
Meanwhile, a variety of factors militate against policy makers address -
ing digital espionage against civil society. For many nondemocratic gov -
ernments, and especially authoritarian regimes, civil society can represent 
a menace to be co- opted, infiltrated, and neutralized. These governments 
may see civil society as an information security threat. But even in demo -
cratic countries there are few incentives to address this problem. For exam -
ple, in a 2014 case, a US grand jury indicted five Chinese individuals for 
“computer hacking, economic espionage and other offenses directed at 
six American victims in the US nuclear power, metals and solar products 
industries” (US Department of Justice 2014). Many link the indictment to 
a subsequent agreement between US President Barack Obama and China’s 
President Xi Jinping to refrain from computer espionage targeting busi -
nesses and critical infrastructure (Harold 2016). It is unlikely that equiva -
lent political capital would be marshalled for such an indictment in support 
of civil society targets. The theft of trade secrets affects jobs, and national 
security is an existential threat that attracts bipartisan support, but the tar -
geting of Tibetans, human rights NGOs, or journalists does not garner the 
same political urgency.
This example illustrates how the structures Winner refers to can obscure 
an important area of information security, in this case the silent epidemic of 
targeted digital attacks against civil society. Targeted digital attacks on civil 
society groups tend to be underreported and largely marginalized because, 
for the private sector cybersecurity threat industry, defending those attacks 
is not profitable and investments of time or resources cannot easily be justi -
fied. For government agencies, the consequences of such attacks rarely rise 
to the level of a political or economic risk that merits public policy atten -
tion. Indeed, a growing number of governments actively target the sector. 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025236 R. J. Deibert
Meanwhile, civil society has very little capacity to deal with the problem, 
creating what is, overall, a failure in the information security market.
A large body of academic research on this area, combined with persistent 
political advocacy directed at governments and the threat industry, could 
raise awareness and help address that market failure, which is precisely one 
of the aims of our research. However, the hurdles standing in the way are 
numerous and growing.
A Political Economy of Information Security Research
In a world of billions of networked devices, it may be easy to forget that the 
Internet began as a relatively small university- based research project. Con -
trary to the widespread myth of the Internet’s origins linking Paul Baran’s 
proposal for a distributed communications system that could survive a 
nuclear war, the early networking infrastructures that were developed and 
that evolved into today’s Internet were concerned with facilitating time-  
sharing of scarce computing resources, not just surviving nuclear attack. 
Engineers focused on enabling network connectivity across nodes and hav -
ing data flow seamlessly. Security of that network or its communications 
was not a high priority (Abbate 1999).
It was not until the Morris worm, in 1988, that the threats around net -
work failure and insecurity became more widely noticed and increasingly 
studied. Researchers began examining how poorly executed code could 
cause systems to crash or be exploited to cause havoc. Significantly, the lens 
through which the growing subfield of information security addressed their 
problems was from a technical- functional one. Research was aimed at high -
lighting technical weaknesses in information security systems’ design to 
optimize against failure, whether accidental or otherwise.
A technical- functional approach may have been appropriate when infor -
mation systems were relatively obscure and compartmentalized. But the 
contemporary information ecosystem, which extends into cultural and 
political systems across the world, is vastly different from that in which the 
early innovators worked. The different institutional environments affect 
what counts as an information security problem in the first place, making 
the security of information less a technical  than a political  issue. Decisions 
on what problems to resolve, and which issues are not even regarded as 
problems, are questions of power ; once those questions are resolved, tech -
nical and engineering questions follow along. Practices of information 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  237
security, seen as a component of technological production, are thus exer -
cises in the architecture of power. Starting from this perspective can help 
illuminate what gets priority as an information security research problem 
and what does not.
Economic Biases of Information Security Research
The problems for which engineering and computer science solutions are 
sought and priorities allocated may reflect factors such as the progress of 
debates in a particular academic field or the evolution of technologies them -
selves. But they may also reflect the existing power structure of a society and 
the constraints and opportunities it presents, both directly and indirectly. 
Among power structures today, economic factors have enormous influence 
on a wide variety of sectors, academic research among them. For example, 
it has become increasingly commonplace for universities to justify their 
programs in terms of an investment in or contribution to the economy. 
Research programs sell themselves in terms of employment training. This 
dynamic has positive and negative incentives on research. Positive incen -
tives push for certain problems to be addressed because they are problems 
for which dominant industries seek creative solutions. For example, social 
media companies’ appetites for better ways of pushing advertisements to 
their customers on the basis of their online behavior undoubtedly incen -
tivizes researchers to find more efficient ways to monitor users. These 
incentives can be direct, through financial support, or indirect, in terms of 
potential postgraduate employment opportunities.
Negative incentives dissuade researchers from looking into certain areas 
of inquiry because doing so may jeopardize those employment opportuni -
ties or risk some kind of legal or other penalty. Examples include undertak -
ing research into security flaws or privacy violations associated with large 
prospective employers. Who wants to interrogate a hidden and prejudiced 
algorithm if it will invoke the wrath of a company’s powerful legal depart -
ment or blacklist graduates from prospective jobs?
Negative incentives may affect the choice of research methods as well. 
For example, reverse engineering software— a method used widely to 
undertake research on software— may infringe on copyright or intellectual 
property laws, such as section 1201 of the US Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act or the US Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Such laws effectively shackle 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025238 R. J. Deibert
certain modes of inquiry by shielding code and networks from outside scru -
tiny. While protecting business secrets may be the official justification for 
keeping code hidden, there may be other, political, reasons as well.
For example, in numerous investigations our research group has shown 
that many popular China- based applications contain hidden censorship 
and surveillance mechanisms that the developers have engineered to com -
ply with their understanding of government regulations. The research 
provides an invaluable insight into China- based information controls on 
popular chat, video- streaming, and gaming applications and how user secu -
rity and privacy is subordinated to comply with regime security. But none 
of the research would be possible without our researchers reverse engineer -
ing the applications, in some cases breaking their encryption, to discover 
what algorithms lie beneath the surface. A strict interpretation of intel -
lectual property laws could chill this research, especially if the companies 
under scrutiny are litigious.
These concerns are not just hypothetical. Our group has been the sub -
ject of legal threats in at least three instances by companies who were the 
subjects of our research. In 2014, the security company Hacking Team expe -
rienced a massive data breach. Those responsible leaked the stolen data to 
WikiLeaks, where it was published online in searchable form. Citizen Lab 
had published several reports on how the company’s products were used by 
autocratic regimes to target human rights defenders, journalists, and mem -
bers of political opposition parties; these reports were widely covered in the 
media and generated negative publicity for the company. A search of their 
corporate emails as archived on WikiLeaks showed that executives reviewed 
the letters we sent to the company before we published reports, in which 
we asked questions about company practices, and that they engaged formal 
legal advice to “hit CL [Citizen Lab] hard” (Lou 2015).
As a component of research into a deep packet inspection system manu -
factured by the company Sandvine and its use in Turkey, Syria, and Egypt 
to redirect unwitting users to spyware and other malicious traffic, Citizen 
Lab researchers purchased a secondhand Sandvine PacketLogic device from 
an online commerce site (Marczak et al, 2018). We set up the device in a 
laboratory to understand its operation and refine the fingerprints we used 
as part of our network measurement methodology. Before publication, we 
sent Sandvine a letter describing our research and asking questions about 
its use in the country contexts. Sandvine threatened legal action against 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  239
the University of Toronto if the device was not immediately returned. The 
University of Toronto denied the request, and the publication proceeded in 
spite of the threat of legal action.
While Hacking Team and Sandvine did not actually launch legal action, 
another company did. Netsweeper became notorious after several Citizen 
Lab reports showed that the company’s Internet filtering technology was 
enabling national- level censorship in several countries, including of politi -
cal and social content. The company filed a $3.5 million defamation suit 
against me, as director of the Citizen Lab, and the University of Toronto, over 
comments made to the media about a Citizen Lab report on Netsweeper’s 
services to Yemen. Canada has historically proved a plaintiff- friendly envi -
ronment for defamation cases. However, on November 3, 2015, the legal 
landscape shifted in Ontario when a new law called the Protection of Public 
Participation Act (PPPA) came into force. It was specifically designed to limit 
strategic litigation against public participation, or SLAPP, suits. In our view, 
the work of Citizen Lab, including the research on Netsweeper, was pre -
cisely the sort of activity recognized as meriting special protection under the 
PPPA. Had our proceedings gone forward, we intended to exercise our rights 
under the act and move to dismiss Netsweeper’s action. Ultimately, how -
ever, Netsweeper discontinued its defamation suit in its entirety. Regardless, 
the case underscores the threats to controversial security research that can 
come from the private sector as well as the types of legal remedies that may 
protect researchers who engage in that controversial research. I return to 
this topic in the conclusion.
Private Sector Gatekeepers on Information Security Research
Our information environment is mediated by large technology companies. 
These companies control massive repositories of data that are relevant to 
information security issues, from protection of privacy to censorship and 
surveillance, to the circulation of state disinformation campaigns, or to 
efforts to further violent radical extremism. They are also extraordinary 
potential opportunities as datasets for researchers to interrogate. Indeed, 
going further than describing these as mere opportunities, it is perhaps bet -
ter to describe access to such data as a research imperative . The less research -
ers know about how these data are collected, analyzed, produced, and used 
to shape and limit users’ communications experiences, the less they can 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025240 R. J. Deibert
authoritatively claim to know about what are arguably some of the most 
important information security issues of the day.
But what are the conditions of access? Who can access the data and 
under what terms? As Lev Manovich (2011, 464) notes, “Only social media 
companies have access to really large social data— especially transactional 
data. An anthropologist working for Facebook or a sociologist working for 
Google will have access to data that the rest of the scholarly community 
will not.” Apart from companies publishing only data or research they 
believe is in line with their for- profit aims, this privatization of core socio -
logical research data may have several consequences for information secu -
rity research. As boyd and Crawford  explain,
Some companies restrict access to their data entirely; others sell the privilege of 
access for a high fee; and others offer small data sets to university- based research -
ers. This produces considerable unevenness in the system: those with money— or 
those inside the company— can produce a different type of research than those 
outside. Those without access can neither reproduce nor evaluate the method -
ological claims of those who have privileged access. (2011, 22)
Researchers who want to work on datasets controlled by companies have 
some options. Some companies provide access to portions of the data, and 
many researchers have made use of this access to undertake pathbreaking 
research. But typically this access is restricted to slices of data or comes with 
subscription fees to larger, or even complete, datasets. Segregating access to 
data in this way reinforces all the usual resource inequities that are found 
across societies: better- resourced departments and universities acquire more 
and better access than those that are less endowed. This division reinforces 
long- standing inequities not only across disciplines but across the world, 
and in particular for researchers in the global South.
The desire to access data may also influence the topics on which research -
ers choose to focus. Companies may encourage access on the basis of having 
researchers tackle problems that companies need to solve and, conversely, 
discourage questions that affect them adversely. As boyd and Crawford 
(2011, 674) point out, “Big Data researchers with access to proprietary data 
sets are less likely to choose questions that are contentious to a social media 
company … if they think it may result in their access being cut.”
The influence of private sector and economic factors biasing information 
security research is likely to grow, as industry becomes a more important 
sponsor of university- based research. According to a report from the US 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  241
National Science Foundation, from 2011 to 2014 federal funds for univer -
sity research fell to $37.9 from $40.8 billion, while during the same period 
industry- sponsored university research grew from $4.9 to $5.9 billion.2
Although biases introduced into university- based research from the pri -
vate sector are definitely not unique to information security, the area does 
have special considerations that bear on the topic. All things being equal, 
large social media companies and other large technology providers would 
benefit by a more narrowly defined version of security that focuses largely 
on technical matters. Companies whose business model rests on surveil -
lance of users’ online behavior are unlikely to sponsor research that under -
mines that model or helps users become aware of just how much they are 
giving away. These incentives privilege a certain narrow definition of what 
counts as information security, one in which user privacy is not included.
Companies will also not likely look favorably on research that highlights 
collusion with governments on lawful access requests or implementation of 
surveillance or censorship of users, which unfortunately is a growing norm 
among countries worldwide (Deibert and Crete- Nishihata 2012). A com -
parison of the full range of state cybersecurity policies would show fairly 
wide variation in what counts as requiring securing and what practices are 
facilitated or encouraged by the policies that are adopted. National- level 
policies have knock- on effects: on companies, consumer behavior, and to 
a large degree, academic research. For example, China’s cybersecurity laws 
require companies to police their networks, censor forbidden topics, moni -
tor their users, and store their customer data on China’s territory, to be avail -
able to authorities upon request. Naturally, the laws affect how products are 
designed, engineered, and effectively secured. They incentivize engineering 
puzzles to be solved and priorities to be addressed. Research resources are 
directed accordingly: perhaps to find ways to better monitor users’ devices 
and online behavior or develop ways to restrict their access to information 
in a manner that is increasingly opaque to users and researchers.
An intriguing and disturbing example concerns research into artificial 
intelligence (AI). The Chinese government’s “Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Development Plan” links AI to China’s so- called social credit 
system— a system whose aim is to combine a comprehensive analysis of 
users’ online behavior with a kind of citizenship score. Major Chinese social 
media companies, like Baidu and Tencent, all of which engineer extensive 
censorship and surveillance into their products, have invested heavily in 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025242 R. J. Deibert
AI research labs. A 2017 article in The Atlantic  describes one Hong Kong 
University– based researcher’s collaboration with the company Tencent:
The students get access to mountains of data from WeChat, the messaging app 
from Tencent that is akin to Facebook, iMessage, and Venmo all rolled into one. 
(“With AI, they can’t do it without a lot of data and a platform to test it on,” says 
Yang, which is why industry collaboration is so key.) In return, Tencent gets a 
direct line to some of the most innovative research coming out of academic labs. 
And of course, some of these students end up working at Tencent when they 
graduate. (Zhang 2017)
As government pressures to control information bear down heavily on 
the private sector, both positive and negative incentives faced by firms are 
invariably passed down to research communities, particularly as industry 
support for university research increases. On balance, these pressures work 
to squeeze out spaces for information security research on censorship, sur -
veillance, lawful access, and privacy.
National Security Biases
The control of information has long been a central ingredient of state power. 
States have used information to control their domestic populations or proj -
ect power abroad, through forms of propaganda or information operations. 
Today, the global information environment sees struggles between states, 
as well as nonstate actors such as private companies, NGOs, and violent 
extremists. Within this multifaceted arena of struggle, numerous practices 
of information security, in turn, can put pressure on and shape information 
security research. While the previous section highlights some indirect influ -
ences of national security via the private sector, in this section we examine 
some direct impacts.
The most important direct tension between national security and 
university- based information security research is that between openness 
and secrecy. Openness is one of the most important foundations for sci -
entific work and is essential for collaboration, peer review, transparency, 
reproducibility of research results, and public awareness and accountabil -
ity. Openness prevents myopic thinking, dogmatism, and the spread of 
misinformation or disinformation. To be sure, there are times when open -
ness is justifiably limited— to protect research subjects’ confidentiality, for 
example— but these are rare exceptions (Resnik 2007).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  243
Just as openness is fundamental to academic research, secrecy is core to 
national security. Many government programs are shrouded in secrecy and 
restricted by legal classification to those with the appropriate security clear -
ances. In nondemocratic countries, such secrecy is used to shield rulers or 
regimes from the scrutiny of citizens. But even democratic countries classify 
a growing volume of data. Among that large volume, government programs 
and activities in the areas bearing on information security— for example, 
signals intelligence, lawful interception, cryptography— are among the most 
highly protected.
As information control has become a top national security priority, 
the balance between secrecy and openness has been dramatically altered 
in ways that affect information security research. One noteworthy exam -
ple concerns the evolving nature of computer emergency response teams 
(CERTs). CERTs emerged in the late 1980s as institutional responses to early 
Internet threats, including the Morris worm. The first CERT was housed at 
Carnegie Mellon University, and many that followed in the United States, 
Canada, and Europe were also housed within universities. Not surprisingly, 
they shared many of the operating principles that are associated with uni -
versity culture, such as transparency, peer review, and horizontal support. 
When a CERT at one university discovered a worm or a bug it would typi -
cally quickly transmit that information to peer CERTs to facilitate a rapid 
remediation of the problem. CERTS were constituent units of what was 
then a self- identified community of information security peers.
Over time, however, the mission and operational practices of CERTs have 
evolved. Many CERTs are now situated institutionally outside universities 
and are formally integrated into government agencies, typically within the 
equivalent of public safety or homeland security departments. Many of 
them are staffed by former or practicing intelligence or law enforcement per -
sonnel. These changes have affected not only how individual CERTs them -
selves function but also the community of CERTs as a whole. For example, a 
research report on the evolving nature of CERTs highlighted that the influ -
ence of national security agencies on CERTs has negatively affected trust and 
information- sharing practices (Morgus et al. 2015). CERTs are less willing to 
share information in ways that they did in the past, particularly concerning 
software vulnerabilities. While CERTs still see themselves as part of a larger 
network (called FIRST), their recomposition and the influence of national 
security pressures have degraded the CERT regime.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025244 R. J. Deibert
National Security Funding of Information Security Research
Pressures on the nature and type of information security research could also 
magnify as a consequence of strings tied to government- sponsored university-  
based research. National security funding can establish conditions that direct 
the sorts of issues that become worthy of study while deprioritizing others. 
Specifically, funding can close lines of communication across academic units 
or come with restrictions that inhibit open exchanges and circulation of 
ideas. The military and intelligence organs of the state have for many years 
financed and supported advanced research. For example, state funding of 
computing, mathematics, and physics was highly instrumental for nuclear 
weapons, ballistic missiles, signals intelligence, aeronautics, and space pro -
grams. Naturally, many of these programs were considered highly sensitive, 
and classification and secrecy were imposed on them and their researchers. 
In the 1960s, opposition to the Vietnam War in the United States gener -
ated controversy about the growing size and influence of classified univer -
sity research projects, and there were substantial campus protests (Carlson 
2007). Many academics expressed concerns that classified research would 
prevent scholars from freely disseminating their research findings, thus vio -
lating one of the fundamental tenets of academic freedom.
Since 9/11, the scope and scale of this type of sponsorship has grown 
substantially (Arkin and O’Brien 2015), while criticism has remained 
largely muted in the face of the now omnipresent justification for univer -
sity research on the basis of creating jobs and deriving revenue. While some 
universities still have strict policies against classified research, many do not. 
Some, in fact, actively seek it out. Those that do seek it out find willing 
sponsors in national security agencies. In the United States, the National 
Security Agency (NSA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
jointly sponsor the National Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber 
Defense program, in which dozens of universities are enrolled.
As these programs grow in size and stature, a major concern is that they 
will begin to shape the nature of inquiry through a mix of positive and 
negative incentives. As the authors of a report on “the most militarized 
universities” in the United States note,
The academy (and by extension the philanthropic world) has failed to establish a 
post- 9/11 academic program to cultivate the next generation of scholars who can 
offer a genuinely civilian counter- narrative to the national security state similar 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  245
to the civilian arms control community created during the Cold War. Even at 
the most elite schools that rank in the top 100, the many centers and research 
institutes focusing on warfare and terrorism are predominantly adjuncts of the 
national security state. (Arkin and O’Brien 2015)
Several cases illustrate how these pressures might manifest themselves. 
In 2013, Matthew Green, a professor specializing in cryptography at Johns 
Hopkins University, wrote a blog post about how the NSA had subverted 
encryption standards as revealed in one of the disclosures of former NSA 
contractor and whistleblower Edward Snowden. University administrators 
formally requested that Green edit his blog post by removing links to the 
leaked documents and the logo of the NSA. Although they later walked 
back their request, some believe (Anderson 2013) the impetus for it came 
from an individual associated with a classified research facility on campus, 
the Applied Physics Laboratory, which is part of the NSA/DHS centers of 
excellence program.
A similar case concerns a talk that was being delivered at Purdue Univer -
sity by the Pulitzer Prize– winning journalist Barton Gellman (2015), who 
was one of the journalists for whom Edward Snowden was a source. Dur -
ing Gellman’s public talk, he included in his slides copies of the published 
Snowden disclosures. Afterward, Purdue University removed the video archive 
of the talk and went so far as to request that the projector used during 
the lecture be destroyed— notwithstanding the material in question being 
already in the public domain. Purdue University is also a participant in the 
NSA/DHS program, the contract for which includes strict regulations on 
the handling and destruction of classified material. Gellman’s experience 
raises a broader issue of researchers’ access to leaked documents housed on 
controversial websites like WikiLeaks.
Some government agencies specifically ask potential employees whether 
they have accessed classified material without permission and will not hire 
those who have even if the information has been published and widely 
read. As an author of an article advocating the use of leaked materials for 
academic research notes, “Researchers may encounter significant obstacles 
in obtaining government grants if their research relies upon information 
leaked from the same government” (Michael 2015).
Another illustration concerns a case in which Carnegie Mellon Univer -
sity researchers deanonymized users of the anonymizer tool Tor. Their pre -
sentation at a major conference was pulled however, at the request of the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025246 R. J. Deibert
Federal Bureau of Investigation, which arrested several people identified in 
the research. Questions were raised as to how the bureau knew of the proj -
ect in advance. An answer might lie in the university’s close relationship 
to the NSA/DHS program. Carnegie Mellon is ranked 27th among the most 
“militarized universities in the United States,” and the Software Engineer -
ing Institute, which is where the researchers were affiliated, “was awarded 
$750 million in federal funding in 2015 for both classified and unclassified 
work” (Arkin and O’Brien 2015; see also Hern 2016).
There could be a number of other impacts of national security fund -
ing on research. In addition to stifling free expression, national security 
influences can affect foreign students’ participation in research. A number 
of US schools have signed a petition (Hern 2016) arguing that US govern -
ment policies restricting foreign students from being involved in sensitive 
research tip the balance too far in the direction of national security over 
academic freedom. Research that is designated by governments as classified 
may increase. Historically, some types of public research, such as research 
on diseases and weapon systems, are classified as dual use and subject to 
state control. Within information security, certain types of cryptography 
have been the subject of classification and export controls. Research into 
supercomputers, quantum computing, and software vulnerabilities could 
also face classification. As one article notes, “Tens of thousands of patent 
applications are manually examined each year under the Invention Secrecy 
Act and referred for a final decision to the Pentagon, National Security 
Agency, Department of Justice and, more recently, Department of Home -
land Security” (Schulz 2014). With more close involvement of national 
security agencies in information security research, it is reasonable to con -
clude that classification of research could become more common.
Just as companies can attract researchers and distort the choice of topics 
through positive and negative incentives, national security agencies can 
do the same. For example, many governments are now developing very 
elaborate and well- resourced psychological operations that draw from psy -
chology, sociology, and computational techniques to predict and shape 
behavior. One top- secret UK Government Communications Headquar -
ters (GCHQ) document, released as part of the Snowden disclosures, “lays 
out the tactics the agency uses to manipulate public opinion, its scientific 
and psychological research into how human thinking and behavior can 
be influenced, and the broad range of targets that are traditionally the 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  247
province of law enforcement rather than intelligence agencies” (Greenwald 
and Fishman 2015). Like the NSA/DHS program, the GCHQ has sponsored 
cyber research centers in the United Kingdom. Cambridge University’s Ross 
Anderson has raised concerns that programs such as these will not only 
steer research into topics beneficial to intelligence agencies; they will affect 
academic integrity. According to Anderson, “They will tell you some irrel -
evant and harmless top- secret fact and they will then say since this person 
has had access to top secret information, we need to be able to review their 
research for the rest of their life. … The object of the exercise is to rein in 
and control security research done in British universities” (Elwell 2014).
Conclusion
As I hope to have shown, what counts as a problem worth investigating in 
the field of information security research is not reducible to technical or 
functional issues, nor does it necessarily follow an objective path based on a 
consensus of academics. Political and economic factors can bias those deci -
sions and affect the nature of inquiry. Approaches to information security 
research that challenge the status quo or highlight nontraditional forms of 
information security that arguably deserve greater attention can receive less 
support and even strong resistance.
Mitigating the trends outlined here will not be simple, nor is there one 
specific solution. Instead, I propose four strategic priorities to help guide 
efforts into broadening, diversifying, and protecting the integrity of the field.
First, interdisciplinary approaches to information security need to be 
encouraged toward building a more expansive discipline of information 
security research that includes insights from social sciences and the human -
ities. Although some progress has been made in this area already, more work 
needs to be done. To begin, we need to remind ourselves that disciplinary 
silos are cultural artifacts that have their basis in particular places, times, 
and dominant interests. This artificial and evolving character of academic 
inquiry is easiest to observe when academic disciplines undergo “paradig -
matic change,” in the words of Thomas Kuhn (1962), or are spawned by 
concerted efforts. To give one example, area studies was formed during the 
Cold War and was spearheaded by financial support from the Ford Founda -
tion on the basis of a perceived need to educate US policy makers about dis -
tant parts of the world (Katzenstein 2002). A similar type of field- building 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025248 R. J. Deibert
exercise is required now around information security research. To be sure, 
field building is not a simple exercise. Quite apart from political, economic, 
and other factors outlined earlier, practical challenges abound. Disciplines 
speak different languages and are a lot like guilds in the sense of protect -
ing their areas of inquiry from outside influence. This type of field build -
ing will require cross- disciplinary collaboration, which is time consuming, 
resource intensive, and organizationally difficult. The effort will require 
building up a community of peers to assist in review and other institutions 
that are essential to field building, such as peer- reviewed academic journals 
and premier conferences. In short, field building will take time, money, 
and extensive networking and advocacy. Fortunately, important seeds have 
been planted, in iSchools, in the subfield of security economics, and in the 
advances made in human computer interaction and user design to bridge 
engineering and the social sciences (see also chapter 6 by Hall, Madaan, 
and O’Hara).
Second, and relatedly, controversial methodologies that are essential to 
information security research will need extra protection. At a time when 
power is increasingly hard coded into the algorithms that surround us, 
academics need the ability to lift the lid and peer inside and beneath the 
surface (see chapter 1 by DeNardis about how “scholarship has to excavate 
and make visible the powers behind the curtain”). Reverse engineering in 
particular— a general term that covers a wide variety of tools, techniques, 
and methods— should be strongly entrenched as a core principle of aca -
demic freedom and an essential element of civic rights. Such protection 
may require adjustments to existing laws and regulations that ensure fair 
use for academics and shield them from frivolous lawsuits that aim to chill 
dissent. The Ontario, Canada, government’s PPPA is one example. Another 
is Aaron’s Law, proposed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation in 2013 as 
an amendment to the US Computer Fraud and Abuse Act in honor of the 
late computer researcher Aaron Swartz.
Third, to guard against the encroachment of national security and pri -
vate sector influences that encourage secrecy and nondisclosure, informa -
tion security researchers should strongly advocate for openness as a core 
principle of academic freedom: open access, open datasets, and open source 
code. Universities should, as a matter of core policy, reject research fund -
ing that places unreasonable limits on free speech and openness or induces 
other types of secrecy.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  249
To be sure, governments will and should provide funding to universities 
for basic and applied research of all sorts as a matter of far- sighted pub -
lic policy, and industry will do the same; but research should not come 
at the expense of bedrock principles that undergird the university system 
itself, such as transparency, reproducibility, publication of results, and 
peer review. Threats of classification loom large over information security 
research, particularly as governments move aggressively into developing 
information warfare capabilities. Writing in 2002, Eugene Skolnikoff noted 
that “the progress of science and technology and their unavoidable rel -
evance to weapons conspire to enormously broaden the subjects that can 
be thought of as threats to security, and that expansion will continue long 
into the future.” Information security researchers around the world will 
need to be prepared to face increasing encroachments on those aspects of 
their work whose open dissemination are deemed threats to the state.
Finally, universities should see information security not as a siloed and 
narrow technical discipline but as a core responsibility connected to the 
preservation of free inquiry and ultimately of knowledge itself. At a time 
when academic subjects are being narrowly justified on the basis of contri -
butions to the economy, it is important to remind ourselves that the uni -
versities have their origin as institutions whose sole purpose was to nurture 
and protect knowledge for the betterment of the human condition. It was 
out of the university that many of the core principles of the Internet were 
born. Now that the Internet is under assault from forces of privatization 
and securitization, it is essential that academia recognize that it has not 
only a role to play but also a special obligation in protecting our public 
commons of information.
Notes
1. I am grateful to Masashi Crete- Nishihata, Christopher Parsons, and Adam Senft 
for comments on a previous draft.
2. Universities are finding it increasingly difficult to retain top faculty and students 
in the face of the overwhelming attraction of high- salaried job opportunities in the 
technology sector. See The Economist  (2016).
References
Abbate, J. (1999). Inventing the Internet . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025250 R. J. Deibert
Adler, E. (2008). The spread of security communities: Communities of practice, 
self- restraint, and NATO’s post– Cold War transformation. European Journal of Inter -
national Relations, 14 (2), 195– 230.
Anderson, N. (2013, September 9). Crypto prof asked to remove NSA- related blog 
post. Ars Technica . Retrieved from https:// arstechnica . com / information - technology  
/ 2013 / 09 / crypto - prof - asked - to - remove - nsa - related - blog - post /
Anderson, R. (n.d.). Economic and security resource page. Retrieved December 16, 
2019, from https:// www . cl . cam . ac . uk / ~rja14 / econsec . html
Anderson, R. (2014, May). Privacy versus government surveillance: where network effects 
meet public choice  (Self- published memo). Retrieved from https:// www . econinfosec  
. org / archive / weis2014 / papers / Anderson - WEIS2014 . pdf
Arkin, W. M., & O’Brien, A. (2015, November 6). The most militarized universities 
in America: A VICE News investigation. VICE News . Retrieved from https:// www . vice  
. com / en_us / article / j59g5b / the - most - militarized - universities - in - america - a - vice - news  
- investigation
boyd, d., & Crawford, K. (2011, September 21). Six provocations for big data . Paper 
presented at A Decade in Internet Time: Symposium on the Dynamics of the Inter -
net and Society. Retrieved from https:// ssrn . com / abstract =1926431
Carlson, E. (2007, September 25). Scholars and secrecy— classified research comes 
under criticism. NACLA . Retrieved from https:// nacla . org / article / scholars - and  
- secrecy - classified - research - comes - under - criticism
Citizen Lab. (2014, November). Communities @ risk: Targeted digital threats against 
civil society  (Citizen Lab Report No. 48). Retrieved from https:// targetedthreats . net /
Deibert, R. (2017). Cyber security. In M. D. Cavelty & T. Balzacq (Eds.), Routledge 
handbook of security studies  (pp. 172– 182). New York, NY: Routledge.
Deibert, R., & Crete- Nishihata, M. (2012). Global governance and the spread of 
cyberspace controls. Global Governance, 18 (3), 339– 361.
Elwell, M. (2014, February 14). Concern over GCHQ interference. Varsity . Retrieved 
from https:// www . varsity . co . uk / news / 6919
Gellman, B. (2015, October 8). Classified material in the public domain: What’s a 
university to do? [Online forum comment]. Retrieved from https:// freedom - to - tinker  
. com / 2015 / 10 / 08 / classified - material - in - the - public - domain - whats - a - university - to - do /
Greenwald, G., & Fishman, A. (2015, June 22). Controversial GCHQ unit engaged 
in domestic law enforcement, online propaganda, psychology research. The Intercept . 
Retrieved from https:// theintercept . com / 2015 / 06 / 22 / controversial - gchq - unit -  domestic  
- law - enforcement - propaganda /
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Biases of Information Security Research  251
Harold, S. W. (2016, August 1). The U.S.- China cyber agreement: A good first step 
[Blog post]. The Rand Blog . Retrieved from https:// www . rand . org / blog / 2016 / 08 / the  
- us - china - cyber - agreement - a - good - first - step . html
Hern, A. (2016, February 25). US defence department funded Carnegie Mellon research 
to break Tor. The Guardian . Retrieved from https:// www . theguardian . com / technology  
/ 2016 / feb / 25 / us - defence - department - funding - carnegie - mellon - research - break - tor
Information Warfare Monitor. (2009, March 29). Tracking GhostNet: Investigating a 
cyber espionage network . Retrieved from https:// citizenlab . ca / wp - content / uploads  
/ 2017 / 05 / ghostnet . pdf
Katzenstein, P. J. (2002). Area studies, regional studies, and international relations. 
Journal of East Asian Studies, 2 (1), 127– 138.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago, IL: University of Chi -
cago Press.
Lou, E. (2015, July 30). UofT lab bane of Italian spyware firm: Leaked files. Toronto 
Star. Retrieved from https:// www . thestar . com / news / gta / 2015 / 07 / 30 / u - of - t - lab - bane  
- of - italian - spyware - firm - leaked - files . html
Manovich, L. (2011). Trending: The promises and the challenges of big social data. 
In M. K. Gold (Ed.), Debates in the Digital Humanities  (pp. 460– 475). Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Marczak, B., Dalek, J., McKune, S., Senft, A., Scott- Railton, J., & Deibert, R. (2018, 
March 9). Bad traffic: Sandvine’s PacketLogic devices used to deploy government spyware 
in Turkey and redirect Egyptian users to affiliate ads?  (Citizen Lab Research Report no. 
107). University of Toronto. Retrieved from https:// citizenlab . ca / 2018 / 03 / bad - traffic  
- sandvines - packetlogic - devices - deploy - government - spyware - turkey - syria /
Maschmeyer, L., Deibert, R. J., & Lindsay, J. (in press). A tale of two cyber conflicts: 
Civil society and commercial threat reporting . Unpublished manuscript under review.
Michael, G. J. (2015). Who’s afraid of WikiLeaks? Missed opportunities in political 
science research. Review of Policy Research, 32 (2), 175– 199. Retrieved from https:// doi  
. org / 10 . 1111 / ropr . 12120
Morgus, R., Skierka, I., Hohmann, M., & Maurer, T. (2015). National CSIRTs and 
their role in computer security incident response. Digital Debates . org  .  Retrieved from 
http:// www . digitaldebates . org / fileadmin / media / cyber / National_CSIRTs_and_Their  
_Role_in_Computer_Security_Incident_Response__November_2015_  -  - _Morgus__Ski  
erka__Hohmann__Maurer . pdf  
Pinch, T. J., & Bijker, W. E. (1993). The social construction of facts and artifacts: Or 
how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each 
other. In W. E. Bijker, T. P. Hughes, & T. J. Pinch (Eds.), The social construction of 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025252 R. J. Deibert
technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology  (pp. 17–  
50). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Resnik, D. B. (2007). Neuroethics, national security and secrecy. The American Jour -
nal of Bioethics: AJOB, 7 (5), 14– 15. Retrieved from https:// doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15265  
 160701290264
Schulz, G. W. (2014). Government secrecy orders on patents have stifled more than 
5,000 inventions. WIRED . Retrieved from https:// www . wired . com / 2013 / 04 / gov  
- secrecy - orders - on - patents
Skolnikoff, E. (2002). Can traditional values survive? Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Working Paper Series. Industrial Performance Center. Retrieved from 
https:// ipc - dev . mit . edu / sites / default / files / 2019 - 01 / 02 - 005 . pdf
The Economist . (2016, April 2). Million- dollar babies. Retrieved from https:// www  
. economist . com / business / 2016 / 04 / 02 / million - dollar - babies
US Department of Justice. (2014, May 19). U.S. charges five Chinese military hack -
ers for cyber espionage against U.S. corporations and a labor organization for com -
mercial advantage. Justice News . Retrieved from https:// www . justice . gov / opa / pr / us  
- charges - five - chinese - military - hackers - cyber - espionage - against - us - corporations - and 
- labor
Winner, L. (1993). Upon opening the black box and finding it empty: Social con -
structivism and the philosophy of technology. Science, Technology, and Human Values, 
18(3), 362– 378.
Zhang, S. (2017, February 16). China’s artificial- intelligence boom. The Atlantic . Retrieved 
from https:// www . theatlantic . com / technology / archive / 2017 / 02 / china - artifi  cial  - intelli  
 gence / 516615
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Discrepancies between Ideas and Practice
Multistakeholder arrangements have a long political tradition on both the 
national and the international level.1 A prominent example for the lat -
ter is the tripartite composition of the International Labor Organization, 
a United Nations agency founded in 1919, comprising representatives of 
governments, employers, and workers. The goal of tripartite organizations 
has been to aggregate the diversity of political positions into identifiable 
groups, which ideally negotiate consensual outcomes that are accepted 
as legitimate by all those affected, regardless of whether they directly par -
ticipated in the process. Multistakeholder arrangements are a more recent 
variation of this model; they have emerged around cross- border or trans -
national issues, typically with civil society groups replacing trade unions as 
public interest representatives.
Over the last 20 years, multistakeholder processes have developed into 
a kind of new blueprint of transnational coordination. The UN Sustain -
able Development Goals, for example, have recognized the formation of 
partnerships between governments, the private sector, and civil society as a 
goal in itself (McKeon 2017). Likewise, the NETmundial declaration (2014) 
acknowledged the multistakeholder approach as the general basis of Inter -
net governance processes. Somewhat antithetic to its rise as a role model for 
legitimate governance arrangements, however, is that empirical case studies 
have found little evidence in support of this success. Quite to the contrary, 
the academic literature keeps lamenting the poor performance of multistake -
holder arrangements.
The apparent discrepancy between expectations and performance of 
multiactor approaches is itself an interesting issue to examine. A growing 12 The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative: A Discourse 
Analytical Approach
Jeanette Hofmann
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025254 J. Hofmann
number of empirical studies, predominantly focusing on environmental 
policy, aim to understand the potential causes of the model’s failures and 
search for ways to reduce them. Another, perhaps less obvious option to 
approach this discrepancy is to reflect on the model itself and the potential 
reasons for its rising popularity despite well- known performance problems. 
The second option takes an interest in the relation between concept and 
practices of multistakeholderism and explores this relationship from a dis -
course analytical perspective. It argues that discursive representations of 
reality are always performative; they exert a powerful impact on political 
processes by shaping collective perceptions of problems and their solutions, 
thereby giving meaning and direction to policy areas (Lynggaard 2012). For 
this reason, discourse analysis deserves more attention in Internet gover -
nance research.
The analysis of the multistakeholder concept touches on, and subjects 
to critical review, the shared knowledge that Internet governance produces 
about itself. As a long- term coproducer of knowledge related to Internet 
governance, academia should aim to include its own storylines in the anal -
ysis. No doubt, this is a difficult endeavor. One way of pursuing this goal 
is to focus on narratives and imaginaries as major building blocks of policy 
discourse. The next section introduces the concept of political narratives 
and imaginaries. The third section provides a short overview of the discus -
sion on multistakeholderism from a narrative point of view. The fourth 
section empirically illustrates the performativity of the multistakeholder 
narrative, followed by a brief conclusion.
Narratives and Imaginaries
Discourses have been defined as knowledge orders consisting of “ensem -
bles of ideas, concepts and categorizations” (Hajer 1995, 44), which ascribe 
meaning to the world and organize our interaction in it. A discourse can 
be distinguished from a mere discussion by an order that guides the cre -
ation of acceptable ideas, observations, and propositions. We thus speak 
of a discourse “to the extent that it is possible to register and describe a 
systematic set of rules for how central problems, their sources and solu -
tions are articulated among a set of agents” (Lynggaard 2012, 90; see also 
Jones and McBeth 2010, 340). The analysis of public discourse can either 
examine actors and their discursive strategies (see Jørgensen’s chapter 8) or 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  255
focus on discursive artifacts and structures. This chapter is interested in the 
latter dimension; it studies collective meaning making as a form of narra -
tive or plot structure relying on imaginaries and specific vocabularies such 
as “multistakeholderism.” The common denominator of these literary con -
structs is the assumption that reality is always in need of representation and 
that any form of representation includes elements of distributed, authorless 
storytelling about how things really are. Even if discursive power is distrib -
uted very asymmetrically, no single actor is able to shape a public discourse. 
Narrativity has been characterized as a fundamental mode of “worldmak -
ing” (Goodman 1978), and its analysis aims to decipher it as a contingent 
open- ended process that could always have taken a different course.
The historian and literary scholar Hayden White (1981, 2) describes narra -
tives as a universal “metacode” that enables communicating “messages about 
the nature of a shared reality.” Facts are selectively assembled into linear 
sequences that suggest a lesson. Irritating more than a few of his colleagues, 
White insists on the common roots of literary and political storytelling. 
The rhetorical strategies used, for instance, by academics to transform scat -
tered data into an enlightening narrative, he argues, are based on the very 
same 19th- century plot structures as those used by novelists: satire, tragedy, 
comedy, and romance (White 1978). In the context of the political narra -
tive on multistakeholderism, romances reward the struggle for the greater 
good by offering at least a thin silver lining on the horizon of democratic 
policy making.
Discourses imply narratives, and narratives, in turn, involve imaginaries 
or fictional elements. Fictions are not just invented; they are a necessary part 
of the political discourse, as Yaron Ezrahi (2012, 3– 4) asserts. Well- established 
imaginaries such as the public sphere or civil society will help us experience 
fictions as facts on which rational behavior supposedly rests. Such imaginar -
ies embody idealized representations of their subject areas and, as Charles 
Taylor (2004) emphasizes, they imply strong normative notions. Building on 
Ezrahi and Taylor, Sheila Jasanoff (2015, 4) defines imaginaries as institu -
tionalized “collective beliefs about how society functions,” how life should 
or should not be lived. Simultaneously, they provide the structural back -
ground against which discursive agency can evolve (Lynggaard 2012, 95).
Narratives and imaginaries constitute powerful sources of political order -
ing.2 By appealing to political ideals and offering streamlined accounts 
of events and underlying causalities, they delimit the range of legitimate 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025256 J. Hofmann
behavior and the space of rational public discourse (Gottweis 2006). Impor -
tantly in the context of the multistakeholder concept, narratives also involve 
“organizational potential” (Hajer 1995). This concerns social identities, 
including classifications, strata, and roles of actors, that structurally config -
ure policy communities (for a famous example, see Anderson 1983) but also 
the motivation for overcoming obstacles and realizing their mission.
Studying narratives and imaginaries implies a focus on the how of politi -
cal ordering. It is less interested in the “input and output of policymaking 
and their causal interrelation” (Pohle 2016, 3) than in the discursive ways 
of making it work and lending meaning to it. However, there is no one best 
way of conducting discourse analysis. While its origins reflect interpretative 
approaches, quantitative analyses are also becoming more common (Jones 
and McBeth 2010; Ten Oever, Milan, and Beraldo’s chapter 10). This chap -
ter combines a literature review on the multistakeholder model within but 
also beyond Internet governance with my long- standing experience as a 
participant of these processes. The next section illuminates typical accounts 
of multistakeholderism to illustrate how it gains credibility and mobilizes 
support amid evidence of mixed or even poor results.
The Multistakeholder Narrative: A Romantic Emplotment
As a term of art, “multistakeholder” emerged in the 1990s and gained broader 
traction after the turn of the millennium. Toward the end of the 1990s, 
the term began spreading across policy domains and came to also denote 
private regulatory arrangements. Famous examples of the multistakeholder 
approach are the Forest Stewardship Council (founded in 1993), the Global 
Reporting Initiative (founded in 1997), and the World Commission on Dams 
(1998– 2000), the latter of which was frequently mentioned in the context 
of the founding of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF). In the meantime, 
multipartite bodies have also become common in areas such as global trade 
and the production of consumer goods (Fransen and Kolk 2007).
The reasons for the proliferation of the multistakeholder approach have 
aroused some interest in the social sciences. A common functional explana -
tion points to coordination problems in the international sphere. According 
to this view, multistakeholder arrangements are a response to the increas -
ing number of cross- border policy issues that require cooperation beyond 
the scope and competence of international organizations. The integration 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  257
of the private sector, civil society, and academia are expected to ensure the 
necessary degree of expertise and other resources but also compliance and 
support at the implementation stage.
Related explanations refer to the regulatory gaps of international policy 
fora, as Baumann- Pauly et al. (2017, 772) note: multistakeholder initiatives 
“increasingly serve a global governance function in regulating what gov -
ernments leave effectively unregulated” (see also Pattberg and Widerberg 
2015). Another widespread view interprets them as the result of bottom- up 
policy pressure. From this perspective, it is mainly civil society that is push -
ing for the democratization of international policy making. Giving non -
state actors a greater say in matters directly relevant for them is assumed to 
increase the legitimacy and effectiveness of international regulation.
Each of these explanations seems plausible. Specifically, they make sense 
by linking the formation of the multistakeholder approach to well- known 
deficits of international policy making. Multistakeholder arrangements, in 
other words, are presented as novel solutions to long- term structural prob -
lems of globalization. Their status as solutions confers to them a normative 
dimension. Seen through the lens of White’s plot structure, the framing of 
multistakeholder efforts as a solution for intricate political problems sug -
gests a romantic tale with a positive ending. Multistakeholder approaches 
seem to show that even the unruly sphere outside the nation- state can be 
changed for the better.
The political and, to some extent, academic discourse on multistake -
holderism is characterized by storylines about how the poor state of trans -
national policy making can be transformed through new partnerships 
between various stakeholders. In particular, three recurring promises struc -
ture this narrative: the ideal of global representation, the ideal of democra -
tizing policy making, and the ideal of improved outcomes.
Global Representation
International rulemaking has traditionally been the remit of governments 
and thus taken place beyond the reach of ordinary citizens. With the steady 
increase of transnational regulation and its impact on domestic law, non -
state actors have pointed out the lack of representation of those affected by 
global governance regimes. As the Cardoso report (United Nations 2004, 8) 
forcefully states, “The substance of politics is fast globalizing …, the pro -
cess of politics is not; its principal institutions … remain firmly rooted at 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025258 J. Hofmann
the national or local level.” Citizens lack institutional means to participate 
in transnational policy processes and make their concerns known. With 
regard to Internet governance, the underrepresentation of nonstate actors 
seems especially problematic because the development and operation of 
the digital infrastructure has been predominantly private sector driven. 
Throughout the 2003– 2005 UN World Summit on the Information Society 
(WSIS), the first intergovernmental process concerning itself with Internet 
governance, the inclusion of nonstate actors was therefore a matter of con -
stant tension between state and nonstate actors (Epstein 2013).
The multistakeholder approach is presented as a solution to the problem 
of underrepresentation since it is expected to include a wide spectrum of per -
spectives, empower marginalized groups, and thereby form a counterforce to 
more powerful actors (B écault et al. 2015). Multistakeholder processes have 
come to embody a redefined notion of global representation. Hence, the lit -
mus test by which multistakeholder processes are assessed is the extent to 
which they manage to include the diversity of interests of those affected and 
to strike a power balance among them (Pattberg and Widerberg 2016).
Democratizing Policy Making
A second problem that multistakeholder initiatives are supposed to address 
concerns democratic deficits. Globalization weakens democracy in several 
ways. As Nanz and Steffek (2004, 314) observe, the concept of democratic 
legitimacy rests on the idea that the people set and consent to the rules 
that organize their political association. The decoupling of the global policy 
process from the constitutional apparatus of the nation- states, including 
the rule of law, creates a “massive democratic deficit.” Moreover, traditional 
forms of holding political power to account do not work in global policy 
processes. What is needed to tackle the legitimacy deficit in the transna -
tional sphere is new decision- making processes that incorporate principles 
of deliberative and participatory democracy and provide “accountability to 
citizens everywhere” (United Nations 2004, 24). Multistakeholder processes 
are assumed to achieve this goal by establishing communities of interest as 
a digitally enabled equivalent to territorial constituencies. They show the 
potential to generate new forms of procedural fairness, transparency, and 
accountability and thus contribute to the overdue democratization of the 
global sphere.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  259
Improved Outcomes
The third challenge pertains to the overall quality of global policy mak -
ing. Intergovernmental organizations are considered unable to cope with 
the amount, gravity, complexity, and pressing nature of today’s challenges 
(Bäckstrand et al. 2010). Negotiation processes are found tardy, at times sub -
stantially inadequate, and leaving many policy issues unanswered owing to 
conflicting interests, missing expertise, dedication, and/or follow- through. 
A widespread disregard of human rights among governments constitutes 
another serious shortcoming for the area of Internet governance, which 
is particularly sensitive to the violation of information freedoms and pri -
vacy rights. Multistakeholder processes are regarded as a solution to these 
challenges because they name and shame misconduct and mobilize exper -
tise, skills, and funding (Fransen 2012, 165). In addition to the expertise 
brought to the table by civil society and the private sector, it is also the 
learning processes enabled by a consensual style of collaboration that are 
said to improve the quality and legitimacy of policy outcomes (Baumann-  
Pauly et al. 2017; Pattberg and Widerberg 2015).
Taken together, the multistakeholder narrative exhibits a deliberative 
and participatory, nearly Habermasian understanding of democratic policy 
making with a strong emphasis on process. As Powers and Jablonski (2015, 
136) nicely phrase it, this notion presumes “that strategic actors, in the 
right setting and by embracing shared norms, can disregard their politi -
cal motivations and pressures to deliberate, listen, adjust perspectives, and 
come into an agreement regarding a matter of public concern.” But can 
this assumption be regarded as an adequate description of multistakeholder 
policy making? Despite its increasing popularity, the overall results of mul -
tistakeholder initiatives in the transnational sphere turn out to be rather 
sobering.
The majority of empirical case studies report disappointing outcomes.3 
For instance, a survey by Pattberg and Widerberg (2016) on tripartite part -
nerships in sustainable development found that most initiatives fail not 
only to develop new global regulatory norms but also to improve the imple -
mentation of existing regulation or to substantially increase the integra -
tion of marginalized groups. Yet as Powers and Jablonski (2015, 152– 153) 
observe, the significance of stakeholder inclusion for the legitimacy of pol -
icy initiatives leads to strong pressure on actors to participate, thereby con -
siderably narrowing the room for independent criticism of the outcomes 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025260 J. Hofmann
or the lack thereof. Tripartite partnerships, Pattberg and Widerberg (2016, 
45) conclude, are “not just neutral instruments” for realizing agreed policy 
tasks; they are “sites of contestation over distinct technologies and prac -
tices.” Hence, multistakeholder initiatives have their own shortcomings, 
and they may fail where multilateral processes have previously gone awry.
Given these empirical findings, the plausibility of the multistakeholder nar -
rative seems to rest less on its practical achievements than on its coher -
ence and plot. What lends credibility to the narrative are the undeniable 
maladies of global regulation and how it connects these to the worthwhile 
goals of multistakeholderism. These goals, in turn, derive their power from 
an imaginary that reaches beyond its immediate context of application. 
The striking popularity of the multistakeholder approach also originates 
in its reference to a metanarrative. The great promise of this metanarra -
tive is that by implementing principles such as inclusiveness, transparency, 
equality, and procedural fairness, the national concept of democracy can 
be extended beyond territorial borders and thereby confer to transnational 
policy making the legitimacy it still lacks. The idea of democratizing global 
regulation is so powerful and uplifting that it seems to withstand all evi -
dence to the contrary.
Yet discourse analysis is less interested in adjusting narratives or reform -
ing malfunctioning processes than in understanding how the two worlds of 
narrativity and regulatory practice interact. Specifically, discourse analysis 
studies how narratives, once they have reached a certain degree of normal -
ity and inevitability (Taylor 2004, 17) become an enabling source of shared 
goals and norms, how they direct action and create a common sense of 
legitimacy. The next section demonstrates the stakeholder narrative at work 
by introducing the IGF and the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN) as two examples, chosen to illustrate the performa -
tive effect of the three promises described earlier.
The Multistakeholder Narrative at Work
The term “multistakeholder” entered the Internet governance landscape in 
2005 during WSIS, which found that existing governance mechanisms did 
not provide the conditions for a meaningful participation of all stakeholder 
groups. The multistakeholder concept gained support for offering a middle 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  261
ground between the contested alternatives of private versus public regula -
tion of the Internet, which had paralyzed large parts of the WSIS negotia -
tions (Musiani and Pohle 2014, 4). Following WSIS, the multistakeholder 
concept rapidly turned into a self- evident norm of the discourse in Internet 
governance. Today, it denotes a broad range of organizational models and 
processes (Raymond and DeNardis 2015, 14).
The epitome of the multistakeholder approach in the digital domain 
is the IGF. Mandated by WSIS and founded in 2006, the IGF constitutes a 
global space for multistakeholder policy dialogue. It is an annual conference 
embedded in preparatory meetings, intersessional activities, and a growing 
number of national and regional offspring. The second example, ICANN, is 
a US- based nonprofit corporation tasked with regulating the domain name 
system (DNS) of the Internet. It was founded in 1998, following a white 
paper issued by the US Department of Commerce (1998) on the premise 
that DNS policies should be developed by a private governance model inde -
pendent of government control. Unlike the IGF, ICANN produces concrete 
outcomes in the form of binding policies. The present mission and legiti -
macy of ICANN and the IGF are firmly rooted in the imaginaries of the mul -
tistakeholder approach. Both organizations are judged by the credibility of 
their claims of global representativeness, their democratic standards, and 
their quality of output.
IGF: “Enact” the Stakeholder Taxonomy
The IGF is the first organization in Internet governance whose founding was 
explicitly based on the multistakeholder principle. The outcome document 
of WSIS (2005) stated that the IGF should “build on the complementarity 
between all stakeholders involved,” and it named them in line with the 
categories used throughout the WSIS process: “governments, business enti -
ties, civil society and intergovernmental organizations.” Although this clas -
sification appears rather clear- cut and simple, the stakeholders expressed 
from the outset uneasiness and dissent about its attributions. Civil society 
and the technical sector, for example, criticized the UN stakeholder tax -
onomy for misrepresenting them and asked for separate categories. These 
categories matter to the stakeholders because they determine their share of 
seats in committees and on workshop panels, and they also shape identi -
ties in the public discourse. The stakeholder roles, divisions, privileges, and 
boundaries are a permanent issue in Internet governance.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025262 J. Hofmann
Since the geographic and political diversity of the actors involved is 
expanding, the stakeholder concept also struggles with problems of internal 
coherence. This seems mainly a problem for civil society and governments, 
both of which are grappling with a broad range of opinions cutting across 
the formal classification scheme. Recalling the enormous effort of making 
the stakeholder taxonomy work within the IGF, Mueller (2010, 114) notes 
how the “simple act” of assembling people from various sectors “for non -
binding dialogue about policy can be intensely political.” The stakeholders 
spent “countless hours” on holding the stakeholder groups together and 
negotiating the boundaries between them, a struggle that Mueller charac -
terizes as “politics of representation” (Mueller 2010, 114– 116).
The difficult match between the stakeholder taxonomy and the political 
spectrum in Internet governance is clearly at odds with the basic idea of 
multistakeholderism, which assumes that political positions can be aggre -
gated along the lines of formal affiliations. Ironically, civil society, the most 
ardent advocate of multistakeholder representation, faces the biggest chal -
lenge in aligning its diverse membership on this model. The case of the 
IGF demonstrates that the stakeholder model does not constitute a natural 
representation of global perspectives. On the contrary, it needs to be con -
stantly “enacted” (Epstein 2013), and a significant part of multistakeholder 
collaboration in the IGF is devoted to doing justice to the democratic imag -
inary of global representation through the never- ending re- creation of the 
stakeholder scheme.
ICANN: Catching Up with Democratic Standards
To be fair, the ICANN community itself never uses the term “democracy.” 
However, the white paper from the Department of Commerce (1998) speci -
fied a set of prerequisites for the development of “sound, fair and widely 
accepted policies,” which do qualify as democratic procedures.4 Among 
them are the requirements of representation and openness and transpar -
ency and, most importantly, that the new corporation should “operate for 
the benefit of the Internet community as a whole” (1998, 31749). Mean -
while, ICANN (2013, 2) has updated the white paper’s language and added 
“equality” to the criteria DNS regulation is supposed to implement: “At 
the heart of ICANN’s policy- making is what is called a ‘multistakeholder 
model.’ This decentralized governance model places individuals, industry, 
non- commercial interests and government on an equal level.”
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  263
ICANN’s policy development process has become increasingly trans -
parent and open to participation over the years; however, the actual 
decision- making authority has remained very resistant to change. The most 
formalized Consensus Policy Development Process in ICANN consists of 
no fewer than 15 steps, beginning with identifying an issue, followed by 
circles of reports and public comment periods, finally resulting in a recom -
mendation to the board. No matter how inclusive, open, and fair the policy 
development process, the final decisions are taken by the board— on the 
basis of advice provided by ICANN staff, a very influential but informal 
filter between the bottom- up policy process and the board. While the mul -
tistakeholder narrative is driven by the idea of democratizing the transna -
tional sphere, ICANN is still struggling to catch up with basic standards of 
democratic nation states. Yet remarkably, even striking democratic deficien -
cies are no reason for ICANN’s stakeholders to question the validity of the 
multistakeholder approach per se. Holding ICANN’s authority to account 
is, rather, something to be fought out, as show the intense negotiations 
surrounding the “Empowered Community mechanism,” created in 2019. 
Multistakeholderism in ICANN, it seems, is less a ready- made solution for 
the pressing shortcomings of global regulation than a long- term agenda in 
itself.
IGF: Negotiating the Meaning of Outcomes
Its mandate requests that the IGF discuss, facilitate, identify, or advise 
on “public policy issues related to key elements of Internet governance” 
(WSIS 2005). How this task should be approached has been a contested 
issue from the start. The IGF’s initial focus on enabling discourse and col -
laboration rather than specific recommendations was met with skepticism 
by those who did not believe in the impact of multistakeholder dialogue 
(Mueller 2015). A UN working group on “improvements to the IGF” also 
recommended more tangible outcomes— for example, by addressing specific 
policy questions and documenting the range of opinions on it (UN Gen -
eral Assembly 2012, 4). The IGF’s cautious efforts to strengthen its efficacy 
notwithstanding, the actual significance of its policy dialogue is hard to 
determine. For some, the policy dialogue is a waste of time; for others it 
facilitates converging expertise, norms, and values. Epstein (2013, 147) sug -
gests a “normalizing” role of the IGF for including nonstate actors in mul -
tilateral processes, while Mueller (2010, 122) speculates that the IGF could 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025264 J. Hofmann
institutionalize our “recognition that authority over Internet governance is 
highly distributed.”
Strikingly, the outcome of the multistakeholder dialogue is primarily 
assessed “through the lens of process” (Epstein 2013, 147), rather than 
against the background of its mandate or the many transnational policy 
issues awaiting attention. So far, no study has been carried out to empiri -
cally assess the impact and quality of the multistakeholder body. The propo -
nents’ focus on process supports the proposition that multistakeholderism 
“is sometimes viewed as a value in itself” rather than an effective form of 
global regulation (Raymond and DeNardis 2015, 39). In light of the mul -
tistakeholder narrative, which promises better policy outcomes, it is also 
interesting to note that the IGF stakeholders do not agree on what actu -
ally constitutes outcomes or on the type of outcome the IGF should strive 
for. The diversity of multistakeholder input thus appears as a double- edged 
sword; it legitimizes policy outcomes and, simultaneously, constitutes an 
obstacle to achieving better ones.
Conclusion: Disenchanting the Multistakeholder Narrative
This chapter starts from the premise that the discourse on Internet gover -
nance can be studied as a powerful source of political ordering. It claims 
that core concepts such as multistakeholderism, which are referred to by 
practitioners and academics alike, represent reality in a meaning- making 
and performative way (see Musiani’s chapter 4). Narratives and imaginaries 
exhibit a strong normative and an organizing capacity, which influence 
how we interpret and engage with the world: multistakeholderism provides 
a sense of identity and belonging to a geographically scattered commu -
nity, offers a taxonomy for defining the relationships among its members, 
and situates this community in a broader ideological context of competing 
modes of transnational regulation.
The actual achievements of the multistakeholder concept are likely to be 
primarily of a sensemaking nature. Its credibility is based on political aspira -
tions rather than on a proven superior regulatory efficacy. From an empirical 
perspective, it is striking how much effort it takes to make multistakehold -
erism work. It is no exaggeration to say that the stakeholders take pains 
to adapt the reality of Internet governance to meet the concept’s assump -
tions. In practice, the people involved do not easily fit into the stakeholder 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  265
categories. Likewise, formal and informal authorities do not like to be held 
accountable, and bottom- up consensus proves to be as contested as other 
modes of decision- making. Multistakeholderism, it turns out, is less a regula -
tory approach than an end in itself; an end that shifts attention to process 
and requests a high degree of belief and loyalty from its followers.
What are the consequences of these findings? Is it time to abandon the 
multistakeholder approach? If narrativity and imaginaries are indeed a nec -
essary, irreducible part of public discourse, as Ezrahi (2012), Stone (1997), 
and White (1981) suggest, the discrepancy between political aspirations and 
practical experiences should come as no surprise. Narratives and imaginar -
ies may gradually fade out but not without other ones taking their place if 
only to enable meaningful political action. Given that narrativity cannot 
be skirted, Internet governance research should include discourse analyti -
cal approaches in its methodological repertoire. Moreover, it should devote 
systematic attention to the “worldmaking” implications of discourse (its 
own contributions included) and seek to dismantle its power by means of a 
deromanticizing critique of Internet governance narratives.
Notes
1. This chapter is an updated and shortened version of Hofmann (2016).
2. In chapter 8, Jørgensen speaks of “discursive imperialism” to denote the expand -
ing scope of successful discourses.
3. For a more extended literature review on the reasons for the poor performance, 
see Hofmann (2016, 33– 35).
4. Democracy can be defined in different ways. In Democracy and Its Critics , Robert 
Dahl (1989, 37) suggests five standards, which are applicable to ICANN because he 
intended them for associations, not for territorial nation- states. These standards are 
effective participation, voting equality, enlightened understanding, control of the 
agenda, and inclusion of adults.
References
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of 
nationalism . London, UK: Verso.
Bäckstrand, K., Khan, J., Kronsell, A., & L övbrand, E. (Eds.). (2010). Environmental 
politics and deliberative democracy: Examining the promise of new modes of governance . 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025266 J. Hofmann
Baumann- Pauly, D., Nolan, J., van Heerden, A., & Samway, M. (2017). Industry-  
specific multi- stakeholder initiatives that govern corporate human rights standards: 
Legitimacy assessments of the Fair Labor Association and the Global Network Initia -
tive. Journal of Business Ethics, 173 , 771– 787. doi:10.1007/s10551-016-3076-z
Bécault, E., Braeckman A., Lievens, M., & Wouters, J. (Eds.). (2015). Global governance 
and democracy: A multidisciplinary analysis . Leuven Global Governance Series. Chel -
tenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Dahl, R. A. (1989). Democracy and its critics . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Department of Commerce. (1998). Management of internet names and addresses: 
Statement of policy. Fed. Reg. 63 (111), 31741– 31751.
Epstein, D. (2013). The making of institutions of information governance: The case 
of the Internet Governance Forum. Journal of Information Technology, 28 (2), 137– 149. 
doi:10.1057/jit.2013.8
Ezrahi, Y. (2012). Imagined democracies: Necessary political fictions . Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Fransen, L. (2012). Multi- stakeholder governance and voluntary programme interac -
tions: Legitimation politics in the institutional design of corporate social responsi -
bility. Socio- Economic Review, 10 (1), 163– 192. doi:10.1093/ser/mwr029
Fransen, L., & Kolk, A. (2007). Global rule- setting for business: A critical analysis of multi-  
stakeholder standards. Organization, 14 (5), 667– 684. doi:10.1177/1350508407080305
Goodman, N. (1978). Ways of worldmaking . Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Gottweis, H. (2006). Argumentative policy analysis. In G. Peters & J. Pierre (Eds.), 
Handbook of public policy  (pp. 461– 479). London, UK: Sage.
Hajer, M. (1995). The politics of environmental discourse . Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Hofmann, J. (2016). Multi- stakeholderism in Internet governance: Putting a fiction 
into practice. Journal of Cyber Policy, 1 (1), 29– 49. doi:10.1080/23738871.2016.1158303
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). (2013, November 
8). Beginner’s guide to participating in ICANN . Retrieved from https:// www . icann . org  
/ resources / files / participating - 2013 - 11 - 08 - en
Jasanoff, S. (2015). Future imperfect: Science, technology, and the imaginations of 
modernity. In S. Jasanoff & S. Kim (Eds.), Dreamscapes of modernity: Sociotechnical imag -
inaries and the fabrication of power  (pp. 1– 33). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Jones, M. D., & McBeth, M. K. (2010). A narrative policy framework: Clear enough to be 
wrong? Policy Studies Journal, 38 (2), 329– 353. doi:10.1111/j.1541- 0072.2010.00364.x
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025The Multistakeholder Concept as Narrative  267
Lynggaard, K. (2012). Discursive institutional analytical strategies: Ecological mod -
ernization and the policy process. In T. Exadaktylos & C. M. Radaelli (Eds.), Research 
design in European studies  (pp. 85– 104). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
McKeon, N. (2017). Are equity and sustainability a likely outcome when foxes and 
chickens share the same coop? Critiquing the concept of multistakeholder governance 
of food security. Globalizations, 17 (3), 379– 398. doi:10.1080/14747731.2017.1286168
Mueller, M. L. (2010). Networks and states: The global politics of Internet governance . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mueller, M. L. (2015, November 16). IGF 2015: Running in place. Internet Governance 
Project. Retrieved from http:// www . internetgovernance . org / 2015 / 11 / 16 / igf - 2015 - run   
ning  - in - place /
Musiani, F., & Pohle, J. (2014). NETmundial: Only a landmark event if “digital cold 
war” rhetoric abandoned. Internet Policy Review, 3 (1), 1– 9. doi:10.14763/2014.1.251
Nanz, P., & Steffek, J. (2004). Global governance, participation and the public sphere. 
Government and Opposition, 39 (2), 314– 335. doi:10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00125.x
NETmundial. (2014, April). NETmundial multistakeholder statement. Retrieved from 
http:// netmundial . br / wp - content / uploads / 2014 / 04 / NETmundial - Multistakeholder  
- Document . pdf
Pattberg, P., & Widerberg, O. (2015). Theorising global environmental governance: 
Key findings and future questions.  Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 43 (2), 
684– 705. doi:10.1177/0305829814561773
Pattberg, P., & Widerberg, O. (2016). Transnational multistakeholder partnerships for 
sustainable development: Conditions for success. Ambio, 45 (1), 42– 51. doi:10.1007/
s13280-015-0684-2
Pohle, J. (2016). Multistakeholder governance processes as production sites: Enhanced 
cooperation “in the making.” Internet Policy Review, 5 (3) https:// doi . org / 10 . 14763 /  2016  
. 3 . 432
Powers, S., & Jablonski M. (2015). The real cyber war: The political economy of Internet 
freedom . Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Raymond, M., & DeNardis, L. (2015). Multistakeholderism: Anatomy of an inchoate 
global institution. International Theory, 7 (3), 572– 616. doi:10.1017/S1752971915000081
Stone, D. A. (1997). Policy paradox: The art of political decision making  (2nd ed.). New 
York, NY: W. W. Norton.
Taylor, C. (2004). Modern social imaginaries . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
UN General Assembly (UNGA). (2012). Report of the Working Group on Improvements 
to the Internet Governance Forum  (A/67/65– E/2012/48). New York, NY: Author.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025268 J. Hofmann
United Nations. (2004). We the peoples: Civil society, the United Nations and global 
governance . New York, NY: Author.
White, H. (1978). Tropics of discourse: Essays in cultural criticism . Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
White, H. (1981). The value of narrativity in the representation of reality. In 
W. J. T. Mitchell (Ed.), On narrative  (pp. 1– 23). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). (2005). Tunis Agenda for the 
information society  (WSIS- 05/TUNIS/DOC/6, rev. 1). Geneva, Switzerland: United 
Nations. Retrieved from http:// www . itu . int / wsis / docs2 / tunis / off / 6rev1 . html
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025As this book demonstrates, there has been an increase in Internet gover -
nance research over the years, including in the number of disciplines used, 
the number of researchers from various countries involved, and the num -
ber of research methods implemented. Yet there are gaps (and concomitant 
opportunities for new work) in the methods used. This chapter provides an 
example of one such gap, work on policy learning as it applies to Internet 
governance. (Policy learning refers to “adjusting understandings and beliefs 
related to public policy” [Moyson, Scholten, and Weible 2017, 162].) It then 
poses several concluding questions regarding how we can study the broad 
panoply of Internet governance processes, including Internet governance 
policy learning in the future. It also builds on work from related research 
arenas to provide a foundation for these future studies, including a discus -
sion of emerging research methods.
A Gap: Policy Learning Research and Internet Governance
To set the scene for an understanding of Internet- governance- related learn -
ing, the concept of policy space (Lambright 1976) provides an important 
frame. It originally referred to a single US government agency that had 
primary responsibility for a specific policy type. In the case of Internet gov -
ernance, the US Department of Defense with its DARPA (Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency) was the original policy space for Internet studies 
(Braman 2011; Braman’s chapter 2). This early research focusing on policy 
space paid little attention to the idea of learning as a process occurring in 
a policy space. With regard to methodology, early work on given policy 
spaces used the case study method and, often, stemmed from the public 
administration field.13 Toward Future Internet Governance Research 
and Methods: Internet Governance Learning
Nanette S. Levinson
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025270 N. S. Levinson
Recognizing the incipient Internet’s commercial and global potential, 
the policy space for Internet- related US governmental matters expanded 
over time to include other US agencies (the Department of Commerce and 
the Department of State), as described in Braman’s chapter 2 and Mueller 
and Badiei’s chapter 3. As the Internet expanded globally, policy spaces 
emerged in other national and then regional arenas and in international 
organization spaces. With the arrival of multistakeholderism (see DeNardis’s 
chapter 1 and Hofmann’s chapter 12), nonstate actors, including technical 
experts, the private sector, and civil society, began to occupy these rapidly 
expanding policy spaces, characterized by fuzzy boundaries.
This chapter highlights five often- interrelated types of learning that can 
occur in today’s multiplex, nuanced, Internet- related policy space. It also 
calls for additional longitudinal research to capture more effectively the 
evolution of these processes, such as who is learning (and at what levels) 
over time. Note that learning can be intentional or unplanned; successful 
or failed. It can occur at the individual, small group, organizational, and 
even interorganizational levels. See figure 13.1 for an overview.
Researching fully these five types of learning calls for an examination of 
the processes as well as the context (characteristics of the policy spaces) and 
outcomes. This requires recognition of the multiple levels of analysis noted 
previously— from the individual to the organizational and even to the 
interorganizational. Adding to this complexity are related, diverse multiple 
• Governance Learning  
 • How new ideas, knowledge
  become acquired and used for
  governance purposes, especially
  involving information flow among
  state and nonstate actor s
• Network Learning
 • How formal or informally linke d
  sets of individuals or organizations
  become aware of, acquire, use, and
  regularize new knowledge
• Policy Learning
 • How individuals or organizations
  adjust “understandings and beliefs 
  related to public policy”
  (Moyson, Scholten, and Weible 2017) • Interorganizational Learning
 • How formal or informal sets of
  connected organizations become
  aware of, use, and routinize ne w
  knowledge across and within
  networked connection s
• Organizational Learning
 • How “organizations identify ,
  interpret, use, and even regularize
  new knowledge”
  (Argote and Miron-Spektor 201 1) 
Figure 13.1
Five learning types.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  271
actors as the chapters in this book highlight: nation- states, regional orga -
nizations, global institutions, international organizations, civil society, and 
private sector organizations. Each of these actors also evokes what I call 
the culture kaleidoscope: cultural variables (including national and occu -
pational and additional cultures and subcultures) that may (explicitly or 
implicitly) shape the choice of research methods and even affect the levels 
of analysis examined. Add to this the legal kaleidoscope of national laws 
and regulations and regional and international laws (see Weber’s chapter 5).
Lewis (2011) describes well the connection among actors in the highly 
complex, networked, and even kaleidoscopic global governance policy spaces 
that now exist (although her work does not focus on Internet governance). 
She writes that “new forms of governance have been created to address new 
governing challenges in a world where few things can be clearly separated 
in meaningful ways. Network governance seems to be both the right meta -
phor to describe the increasing fragmentation, the growth of problems that 
are ill- defined and which span boundaries, and the resulting dynamics of 
interconnection that define contemporary governance and policy- making, 
and to signal a set of governing responses to this changed environment” 
(2011, 1222). While these words do not specify whether they apply to indi -
viduals or organizations in a networked policy space, they do capture well 
the arena or ecosystem that is the messy global, multistakeholder, interor -
ganizational topography of Internet governance learning today. Indeed, no 
one governance policy space stands alone; thus, this chapter also calls for 
the tracking of cross- policy- space learning.
The Contexts
Figure 13.2 summarizes key contextual elements (characterizing the envi -
ronment or setting surrounding Internet governance or policy learning) 
already identified in the preceding chapters and in the larger literature. One 
element, central to a number of methodologies, is the type of technology  and 
any possible interactions among the technologies and other elements in 
an environmental setting (DeNardis 2012; DeNardis’s chapter 1). A second 
is the availability of resources  (munificence); resources include the availabil -
ity of technology as a resource, money, people, power (Castells 2007; Nye 
2011, 2014), and information supply (technical, political, social). Third is 
the presence of cultures . I have written about the culture kaleidoscope (cul -
ture at small- group, organizational, national, diasporic, and occupational 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025272 N. S. Levinson
levels) (Levinson 2012). Additionally, there are age-  and generation-  and 
gender- related cultural characteristics. Each type of culture constitutes an 
element in the environment and has potential for shaping processes in and 
beyond that setting.
Fourth is the absorptive capacity  present (Cohen and Levinthal 1990), 
referring to the ability of an organization to soak up new information. 
There are many types of absorptive capacities, ranging from the techni -
cal (the ability of an organization to absorb new technical knowledge or 
technologies themselves) to a general organizational learning capacity. Par -
ticularly helpful in the context studied here is the work of Easterby- Smith, 
Lyles, and Tsang (2008, 678) that discusses absorptive capacity with a focus 
on the organizational level as an “ability to recognize the value of new 
knowledge and to assimilate and use that knowledge.”
There is, of course, an important interaction between cultures and 
absorptive capacity. See the work, for example, of Hofstede (1983) for a dis -
cussion of national culture and its propensity for organizational learning. 
Related to the notion of absorptive capacity and also cultural contexts is 
the work on how “sticky” new knowledge is (Szulanski 2002). As Kamkhaji 
and Radaelli (2017) point out in their study of European Union learning 
prompted by crises (another dimension of the context), the acquisition 
CultureStickiness
idea presence Collaborative
absorptive
capacityNorms and values
• Trust
Homophily
• Champions and idea entrepreneurs
Bridging actors, structural hole patterns,
collaboration with actors, institutions, sectors
• Technology 
 TypeAdministrative
structures and governance
• History
Crises and stability
• Resources, ideas availability
Leadership patterns
Figure 13.2
Contextual elements.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  273
of knowledge and its utilization and routinization over time is central to 
policy learning.
A new dimension, yet to be analyzed in the Internet governance field, 
is what I call collaborative absorptive capacity . This refers to the ability or 
potential of an organization or network of organizations to collaborate 
whether on a joint project or policy design, implementation, or evaluation. 
The degree of stability  in an environment is a fifth characteristic, followed 
by a sixth, the holistic history  of a particular environmental setting. This 
includes trends over a long period. Here early work in the field of popula -
tion ecology (Hannan and Freeman 1977) argues that a particular set of 
characteristics in a given environment shapes the organizations that sur -
vive over time in that environment.
Related to these characteristics is the presence (or absence) of ideas  in an 
environmental setting. Diane Stone (2013, 175) puts it well when she traces, 
using case study and network analysis methods, how ideas created by think 
tanks flow transnationally. An example present in the Internet governance 
policy space is the concept of multistakeholderism. See the chapters by 
DeNardis (chapter 1), Braman (chapter 2), Mueller and Badiei (chapter 3), 
and Hofmann (chapter 12), which illustrate this concept, its study, and its 
stickiness in the Internet governance arena.
For example, the setting is rewarding (per the population ecology model) 
both moving away from prior governmental monopolies of telephone and 
telecommunications networks and moving toward coprocesses. Note that 
the mere presence of multistakeholderism does not imply the concomitant 
presence of truly collaborative processes. An additional element is the pres -
ence of norms and values  (Finnemore and Hollis 2016; Henry 2011). This 
dimension of the environment is even more relevant currently, as various 
actors grapple with developing and articulating norms and values related 
to platforms.
Next, we need to pay attention to the actors  in the context. Who or 
what unit is doing the learning? The presence or absence of homophily  
(perceived similarity among individuals) fosters trust in learning processes 
(Reagans 2011). There is also a need for clarity on which levels of analysis 
are studied and on any interactions among these levels (Pahl- Wostl 2009). 
Another view of actors outlines the roles they play. Some serve as bridging 
actors (Spekkink and Boons 2015), occupying roles that link organizations. 
They can, indeed, also bridge structural holes and foster the flow of ideas 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025274 N. S. Levinson
across organizational and network boundaries (Burt 2009). Note that new 
social media can instantaneously bridge structural holes. (With regard to 
bridging, boundaries and boundary organizations are important concepts 
in science and technology studies research (see DeNardis’s chapter 1 and 
Musiani’s chapter 4).
The term “actors” also goes beyond the individual level to include the 
organizational and even the institutional (Craft and Wilder 2017): govern -
ments, private sector organizations, and civil society organizations and insti -
tutions (including international organizations such as the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) or the UN’s Educational, 
Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Telecommu -
nication Union, and Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) that 
are of much interest in Internet governance and related global governance 
studies. Galaz et al. (2017, 11) find “complex institutional interactions and 
actor constellations crisscrossing institutional levels, sectoral policies, and 
established public- private partnerships.” The flow of information across 
these interactions, as noted earlier, is important to track.
We also see the emergence of new institutions in policy spaces. An outcome 
of the UN- sponsored World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) was 
the 2006 creation of an entirely new entity— distinctive, dialogue- focused, 
and multistakeholder in nature but not decision- making— the Internet Gov -
ernance Forum (IGF) (see Braman’s chapter 2, Mueller and Badiei’s chapter 
3, Cogburn’s chapter 9, and Hofmann’s chapter 12). This multistakeholder 
setting can be a locus for policy learning. (See Levinson and Marzouki [2016] 
for examples of such learning episodes.)
Finally, there are four additional and relevant characteristics of the envi -
ronment. First, Weber and Khademian’s (2008) work highlights both initial 
reputation- based trust and prior development of knowledge- based trust as 
key contextual elements for successful interorganizational transfer of prac -
tices. Second, additional work examines governance patterns  of any formal 
sets of organizations or formal networks and their effects on idea flow and 
use. Third, the public administration field (Stone 2019) yields research that 
identifies the presence or absence of potential or actual champions or idea and 
policy entrepreneurs  as key factors in idea or policy transfer. Fourth, research 
in the environmental governance field (Wurzel, Liefferink, and Tomey 
2019) highlights leadership  patterns at the individual, organizational, or 
even network (interorganizational) levels in terms of such impacts.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  275
The Processes
What is taking place with regard to policy and Internet governance learn -
ing processes? To which concepts should we pay attention to understand 
the nuanced happenings in Internet governance processes, especially pol -
icy learning, organizational learning, or governance learning? Each of these 
processes has a representative literature with slight cross- fertilization. (See 
figure 13.3 for a list of major learning processes that can be applied to Inter -
net governance and its ecosystem.)
Separate but sometimes overlapping bodies of research are dedicated to 
policy learning, organizational learning, and more recently, network learn -
ing and governance learning. With regard to organizational learning, schol -
arship most often originates in the business management or organization 
and cognitive psychology fields, primarily with private sector arena focus—  
again with little cross- disciplinary dialogue (see Argote and Miron- Spektor 
2011). The work on policy learning and network or governance learning 
tends to come from the public administration and political science fields. 
These scholars use research methods common in their fields. Finally, while 
governance learning as a concept dates back to at least Ruggie’s (2001) 
Knowledge creation and transfer
Change processes
Policy learning
Organizational learning
Relational learning
Multistakeholder
network governance learning 
Cross-ecosystem learningIdea generation, 
diffusion, and utilization
Individual, organizational,
and interorganizational 
levels
Four types
Organizational focus
Individual focus
Possible collaborative,
cross-sector learning
Cross-ecosystem leadership 
Figure 13.3
Learning processes.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025276 N. S. Levinson
work, more recent scholarship (especially in the area of environmental gov -
ernance) examines network governance and network governance learning, 
as discussed later. Here the unit of analysis is more than one government 
agency and can include nonstate actors or organizations as well.
Policy Learning, Organizational Learning, and Network Governance
“In short, network governance rests on a recognition that policy is the result 
of governing processes that are not fully controlled by governments. Policy-  
making occurs through interactive forms of governing that involve many 
actors from different spheres” (Lewis 2011, 1222). Lewis’s analysis applies 
well to the multistakeholder setting in much of Internet governance work.
Research on the attitudes that government policy makers bring to their 
work and that may shape policy learning is emerging. Jeffares and Skelcher 
(2008) used social network analysis and pioneered a Q methodology that 
allowed them to survey the attitudes of English and Dutch civil servants to 
understand better what these policy makers bring to the table. They identi -
fied different attitude clusters: pragmatism, realism, adaptation, and opti -
mism. Having Internet governance research that focuses on stakeholders in 
multistakeholder settings and their attitudes and discourse as they begin 
to interact in such settings provides a valuable addition to our knowledge 
base. (See Cogburn’s chapter 9 and Hofmann’s chapter 12 for examples.)
Argote and Miron- Spektor (2011, 1124) provide an overview of organiza -
tional learning and define it as “a change in the organization that occurs as 
the organization acquires experience”; it involves three sub- processes: “cre -
ating, retaining and transferring knowledge.” There are differences between 
organizational learning in the public sector and in the private sector, thus 
possessing implications for networked governance (with a focus on net -
worked organizations) learning. Visser and Van der Togt (2016) highlight 
these sectoral differences and link them to differing scholarship traditions 
in public administration compared with business management.
Governance learning itself relates to “the processes and procedures of 
multistakeholder decision- making and planning” (Challies et al. 2017, 289). 
Challies and colleagues study novel European Union water governance for -
mats that are multistakeholder and multilevel in nature; they are especially 
interested in how policy makers design and run participatory processes. This 
work can inform Internet governance studies, in which often the same partici -
patory, multistakeholder phenomena are at work. (See also Apgar et al. 2017.)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  277
Newig, G ünther, and Pahl- Wostl (2010) and Newig et al. (2016) underline 
various types of governance learning. These include parallel learning (from 
other policy fields), serial learning, learning from endogenous sources, and 
learning from exogenous sources (from other jurisdictions and from other 
fields). Thus, the emphasis here on characteristics of contexts and the actors 
in those contexts is key regarding learning from exogenous sources.
The field of Internet governance needs additional studies of governance 
learning processes, whether developing-  or developed- nation policy spaces. 
What are the actual knowledge flow processes across individuals and across 
unlike organizations over time? Is new knowledge or evidence actually used 
and, if so, how in governance processes? Does this new knowledge stick? 
What research methods work well for such studies?
Linking governance learning (which goes beyond organizational learning) 
to policy learning, Lewis (2011) sees policy as the result of multistakeholder-  
infused governing processes. Thus, she argues that governments no longer 
have total control of policy processes. Further, Dunlop and Radaelli (2013, 
603) note that policy learning can involve four types of learning: reflexivity, 
pluralistic bargaining, epistemic, and hierarchical.
While Dunlop and Radaelli focus on European fiscal policy (finding the 
pluralistic bargaining and hierarchy modes most prevalent in their study of 
two European Union countries), their policy learning typology holds power 
for other global governance domains. Internet governance policy learning 
has the following additional categories, each of which can have present one 
or more of the Dunlop and Radaelli types: policy learning related to design, 
implementation, or evaluation.
A fascinating addition to the literature is work on policy learning via 
policy experiments. This work links policy learning to environmental gov -
ernance and defines policy experimentation as “a process that generates 
learning through an explicit intention to test new ideas” (McFadgen and 
Huitema 2017, 1767). It also highlights a category of learning McFadgen 
and Huitema term “relational learning”— “a change in trust, the ability to 
cooperate, and understanding of other parties” that occurs in policy experi -
mentation. Calling for future research to consider quality of leadership, 
demographics, and motivations of participants, this work possesses much 
potential for understanding the complex Internet policy space, especially 
those spaces involving multistakeholder participation. A rare example of 
an experimental approach in the Internet governance field is the Fishkin et 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025278 N. S. Levinson
al. (2018) study in which the researchers use deliberative polling as a data 
collection tool.
Knowledge Creation and Transfer Processes
In this complex and relatively new multidimensional policy space, knowl -
edge creation, dissemination or transfer, and use become key targets of 
study, along with innovation creation, diffusion, and use. This literature 
has had its own research arena, primarily in the communication studies 
field (Rogers 1962), with little cross- fertilization until the advent of the 
Internet. There is much opportunity now to trace an idea or practice or 
policy moving from the environmental governance arena to the Internet 
governance and security arenas or vice versa. We also need to consider the 
time, or longitudinal element, in such learning.
Contemporary work in the field of policy making increasingly high -
lights evidence- based policy making (Head 2016). There is some research 
that focuses on knowledge brokers and how they might promote informa -
tion transfer. Howlett, Mukherjee, and Koppenjan (2017) identify five types 
of brokers, or bridging actors: coordinators, consultants, gatekeepers, rep -
resentatives, and liaisons. Looking at governance learning or collaborative 
governance learning possibilities, Head identifies eight main knowledge 
transfer and exchange modes for brokers (2016, 478– 479):
• Face- to- face exchange between policy makers and researchers
• Educational meetings for policy makers
• Networks and communities of practice
• Meetings with facilitation between researchers and policy makers
• Cross- disciplinary and interactive workshops
• Capacity building
• Web- based information and communication
• Steering committees that interpret research and integrate local experts’ ideas 
into design
This work also underlines the absence of effective brokering. It may 
be— future research will inform us— that the coprocess and participatory 
approach detailed earlier can minimize the need for brokering and maxi -
mize the effective incorporation of research or evidence from practice into 
policy making. Yet it may also be true that brokering remains an important 
function, given the highly technical nature of Internet infrastructure and, 
especially, emerging and converging Internet- related technologies.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  279
There is a need, too, for more cross- policy- space work on what catalyzes 
policy learning in each domain and across global governance domains. 
Some of the works cited here include a focus on crises as a catalyst for policy 
learning, but further research is needed to understand the full panoply (as 
well as rich impacts) of catalytic factors. Future research should consider 
findings (and methods) from work on improvisation and bricolage (Cros -
san 1998) as responses to crises or uncertainty.
Additionally, the actual presence of informal or formal networks, as in 
multistakeholder contexts, gives rise to possible coprocesses leading to col -
laborative governance learning or absence thereof (Baird, Plummer, and 
Bodin 2016; Boivard et al. 2016). Moyson (2017) discusses cocreation pro -
cesses in three settings and highlights how context counts in Estonia, the 
Netherlands, and Germany. Elsewhere, Levinson and Marzouki (2016) 
begin to analyze coprocesses in the context of global Internet governance, 
using document analysis and in- depth interviews.
While Internet governance research has begun to analyze coprocesses, it 
has taken little notice of research using the advocacy coalition framework 
(ACF) approach. That approach appears primarily in the political science 
and public administration literature. Weible, Sabatier, and McQueen (2009, 
132) define “(advocacy) coalitions as consisting of members who share pol -
icy core beliefs and engage in a nontrivial degree of coordination.” There is 
a need to compare this ACF approach (Weible and Carter 2017) with a mul -
tistakeholder approach (Raymond and DeNardis 2015; see also Jørgensen’s 
chapter 8 and Hofmann’s chapter 12) wherein stakeholders can and do 
have differing policy core beliefs. The ACF links to knowledge transfer and 
policy learning as a result of advocacy coalitions sharing information with 
policy makers, whereas a multistakeholder approach encompasses greater 
complexity with regard to the disparate cultures, power panoplies, sec -
tors, countries, institutions, and individuals involved, each with distinct 
perspectives and policy beliefs. ACF shares research methods with Inter -
net governance scholars. This includes the use of interviews, surveys, and 
document and archival analysis; ACF work also emphasizes the need for a 
longitudinal dimension, often calling for a 10- year period for analysis.
Beginning with either the birth of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
(approximately 1986), the network of technical experts from around the 
world who came together and continue to meet to craft many Internet-  
related standards, or the creation (in 1998) of the Internet Corporation for 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025280 N. S. Levinson
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) (Klein 2002; Kleinw ächter 2000; 
also see DeNardis’s chapter 1 and Ten Oever, Milan, and Beraldo’s chapter 
10), we can trace knowledge transfer episodes both within and across unlike 
organizations. Indeed, we can also trace the growth of multidirectional 
learning both within informally connected networks and across formal 
network organizational arrangements. Networked organizations concerned 
with Internet policy matters and across global governance policy domains 
also provide rich examples of knowledge transfer and coprocess episodes 
(Levinson 2015).
Elsewhere, using case study approaches and content analyses rooted in 
communication and organizational sociology, Levinson (2012) has docu -
mented the dissemination and use of multistakeholder approaches, which 
are especially evident in the IGF, created as a multistakeholder entity in 
2006. The IGF’s advisory board, at its inception, was called simply the advi -
sory group. It was not until almost a year later that the name was changed 
to the Multistakeholder Advisory Group. Central to this change was the 
executive director of the IGF, Nitin Desai, who formerly had worked on 
environmental governance challenges at the United Nations and, thus, had 
become aware of the idea of multistakeholder approaches at an environ -
mental summit before taking on his role in the Internet governance arena.
The IGF by its very constitution is not a decision- making or direct 
policy- making body, but it provides a locus for informal policy learning. 
The IGF website itself advertises that the IGF is a place designed for cross-  
sector or multistakeholder dialogue, thus having the potential to catalyze 
policy learning.1 The annual IGF meetings, held in locations throughout 
the world, place proceedings’ transcripts online. Content analyses of these 
proceedings provide evidence of the transfer of ideas through awareness 
raising and dialogue (see Cogburn’s chapter 9); this knowledge flow can 
be traced to nation- state government decision- making. For example, the 
announcement of the US Department of Commerce decision to end much 
of its contractual relationship with ICANN in its historic affirmation agree -
ment with ICANN in 2009 uses the language of multistakeholder, interna -
tional bottom- up governance, echoing discourse at the IGF.
In the case of cybersecurity, the September Group of Seven Declaration in 
Turin, Italy, (Group of Seven 2017, declaration point #6) highlights a simi -
lar phenomenon. It calls for governments to have increased cooperation 
with the private sector and beyond: it is “crucial to engage proactively with 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  281
the private sector, scientific community, academia, the technology com -
munity and civil society in an open, inclusive and transparent approach to 
developing our policy responses and initiatives.” And its annex 3 on cyber -
security underlines the need for cooperating with the private sector. Trust, 
awareness, and information sharing emerge as important.
Carrapico and Farrand (2017) underline this increasing role of the pri -
vate sector in cybersecurity and cyberspace policy. They and Van Eeten 
(2017, 433) find a “surprising amount” of voluntary activity. The expan -
sion of Internet governance policy space to include private sector and even 
civil society actors also gives rise to accountability questions (Eggenschwiler 
2017) and to power- differential questions related to learning processes. 
Deibert’s chapter 11 adds to the accountability dimension and provides an 
in- depth view of power roles in Internet governance policy making. Study -
ing these dimensions calls for research methods such as in- depth qualita -
tive or experimental approaches that can capture rich nuance.
The Outcomes
Much more work in the area of outcomes is needed, in at least two cat -
egories: the identification of outcome types and of research methods for 
studying the presence or absence of collaborative learning and governance 
(Baird and Bodin 2016; Challies et al. 2017). See figure 13.4 for an overview. 
Kamkhaji and Radaelli (2017) talk about policy learning itself as an out -
come, particularly in the face of crisis, and argue that policy learning fol -
lows change. Similarly, Or and Aranda- Jan (2017) write about governance 
after the global financial crisis and underline civil society joining nation-  
states as key actors.
Some public administration literature examines outcomes in terms of 
network effectiveness (and as a subset, network management) (Provan and 
Kenis 2008; Provan and Lemaire 2012; Steijn, Klijn, and Edelenbos 2011). 
Provan and Lemaire (2012) also highlight barriers to network effectiveness 
(with a focus on US public service delivery) while Raab, Mannak, and Cam -
bré (2013) track how network structure, context, and governance relate to 
network effectiveness in the context of 39 interorganizational networks 
focused on reducing recidivism in the Netherlands. Note that Raab, Man -
nak, and Cambr é examine outcomes at the community level. They find 
that network effectiveness depends on how aligned the strategy and goals, 
governance mode, structure, people, and management processes are and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025282 N. S. Levinson
how they match the environmental context. There is also work on lead -
ership of networks and network effectiveness (Busch and Barkema 2019; 
Wurzel, Liefferink, and Tomey 2019).
Scholars have already studied two specific outcome types in policy learn -
ing settings: the development of new knowledge and the change in beliefs 
(Leach et al. 2013; Moyson 2017). Moyson (2017) examined consistency 
and cognition in policy learning, finding that core policy beliefs in the 
groups he studied appear to be stable over time.Partnership
formationNetwork
managementNetwork 
effectivenessNew
knowledge and
performance
Output
legitimacy
Idea, knowledge
utilization
Time
dimensions
-Immediate
-Intermediate
-Long term
Figure 13.4
Outcomes.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  283
Other research (Allan 2017, 131) focuses on climate change and global 
governance and describes outcomes as the result of a “dynamic, interactive 
process between states and scientists” rather than a one- way knowledge 
transfer from scientists to states. Using a science and technology studies 
approach, Allan illustrates the ways in which political figures play a key 
role in knowledge production; further, he argues that on the basis of his 
research one cannot separate the science (and scientists) from politics. In 
sum, his study provides an example of nuanced, nonlinear coproduction 
processes and also possesses implications for how policy makers use infor -
mation. (See also Weiss [1979] for an early study of how US policy makers 
use information and Nwagwu and Iheanatu [2011] for a study of Nigerian 
policy makers’ use of information.)
In the health and the security arenas, there are similar discussions regard -
ing research on outcomes. Krahmann (2017) underlines performance mea -
surements as outcomes and argues for adopting a performative approach 
that finds international, as opposed to local, actors determining outcomes. 
This work also raises ethical issues, as the author questions “output legiti -
macy” (Krahmann 2017, 60).
Another study (Galaz et al. 2017) argues that research does not give enough 
credence to the power and roles of international institutions and networks. 
The particular focus of this work is risks related to climate change, food crises, 
and financial crises. In sum, they find that international institutions do have 
impacts on state institutions. This corresponds to findings from Levinson 
and Marzouki (2016) in the Internet governance arena in which international 
organizations play complex roles with regard to generating and sustaining 
novel ideas that are not always consonant with individual member states’ 
positions. These ideas feed into the policy learning process at international 
levels. Finally, work on land mines discusses the power of nongovernmental 
organizations and networks to bring about policy change through nation-  
state participation in an international setting (Rutherford 2000).
Research Methods and Approaches
The work on international institutions and networks and the complex -
ity and turbulence that characterize the Internet governance field raise a 
significant research challenge similar to that posed in DeNardis’s chapter 
1: How can we best study the outcomes of learning processes related to 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025284 N. S. Levinson
coproduction (or other), whether the coproducing involves the effective -
ness (or management) of a network or the design or implementation or 
even evaluation of a policy or simply governance learning over time? This 
book’s chapters provide a rich and representative portfolio of methods, 
including qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods. These include archi -
val analysis, discourse analysis, automated text analysis, social network 
analysis, interviews, focus groups, participant observation, surveys (includ -
ing online surveys), and case studies. Experiments and simulation also sup -
ply rich and nuanced data.
As we consider measuring or analyzing outcomes, it is vital to incorpo -
rate a longitudinal time frame (Moyson 2017; and see Jardine’s chapter 7). 
As change logic analysts argue, there are at least three time- linked dimen -
sions in outcome categories: outputs (immediate), outcomes (intermediate 
time range), and impacts (long- term time range). See, for example, the Kel -
logg Foundation’s Logic Model Development Guide (2004).
Moreover, there are many organizational learning contexts on which to 
focus, each of which has its own culture and absorptive capacity. For exam -
ple, the United Nations, its UNESCO, and its International Telecommuni -
cation Union subsystems are real examples of the presence or absence of 
interorganizational and cross- sector learning. Or one can use ICANN or the 
Internet Engineering Task Force or IGF as focal organizations, as do many of 
the chapters in this book. One can also explore intraorganizational or endog -
enous learning; in the UN system, for example, one can study staff roles 
vis- à- vis member- state representative roles within each organizational unit.
Researchers who work on specific global governance arenas have an 
important opportunity now to undertake additional comparative studies 
that include attitudinal dimensions and examine organizational learning, 
policy learning, and networked governance learning contexts, processes, and 
especially, outcomes. Research methods need to go beyond those discussed 
here and be shared across governance arenas. As technologies emerge and 
converge, there are numerous opportunities to innovate and experiment in 
our studies.
While this chapter provides the example of policy experiments as a type 
of policy learning, there is much potential also for actual experiments to 
illuminate organizational, policy, and governance learning. There is also 
an important opportunity and need to examine intricate interrelationships 
among organizational, policy, and governance learning and to, especially, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  285
incorporate cultures and infrastructure (Musiani et al. 2016; see also DeNar -
dis’s chapter 1 and Musiani’s chapter 4) into the discussion. To do this, 
a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods is necessary. One 
approach discussed earlier, that of science and technology studies schol -
ars (DeNardis’s chapter 1; Musiani’s chapter 4), possesses much potential 
(see also Epstein, Katzenbach, and Musiani 2016; Katzenbach et al. 2015). 
Another approach used in global governance policy spaces is that of partici -
patory action research. This participatory focus is particularly powerful in 
analyzing policy spaces characterized by collaborative or coprocesses.
Another new approach focuses on the individual level and incorporates 
methods from cognitive psychology to capture changing belief processes 
and learning. Finally, the time is ripe for using knowledge transfer theory 
and methods regarding any cross- governance (and cross- cultural) policy 
space learning, especially with a focus on absorptive capacity.
Shared Research Challenges: Implications for Future Studies
Internet governance (including policy learning) shares at least six research 
challenges with other global governance arenas such as environmental or 
health governance:
• A technical or scientific dimension
• Multiple levels of analysis (from the individual to the interorganizational)
• Increasing involvement of nonstate actors
• Multilayered interactions including cross- border, cross- cultural, and 
transnational
• Complex regulatory questions
• Uncertainties (including technological developments and convergences) 
and turbulence that contribute to added complexity
Taken together, the chapters in this book also highlight what is distinctive 
about the Internet governance field we research. The five elements below, 
from a research perspective, echo the five features that DeNardis in chapter 1, 
using a practice perspective, argues distinguish Internet governance:
• The nature of the Internet itself— the infrastructure
• The inextricable links among infrastructure and social, political, and 
economic dimensions
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025286 N. S. Levinson
• The time dimension with the Internet’s instantaneous impacts
• The information intensities of Internet- related activities
• The emerging synergies with science (e.g., nanotechnologies), mechan -
ics (e.g., the Internet of Things), and other yet undetermined fields
The conceptual frames and research methods we use need to match these 
complex and dynamic characteristics. Clearly, as illustrated in this book, 
there is no one method to capture all the complexities of Internet gover -
nance as it exists in 2020 and in the years ahead. Yet the methods presented 
here do presage emerging methods, including the increasing use of ethical 
experiments and clinical models for the conduct of research. Cross- research 
field dialogue such as can be seen in Hofmann’s chapter 12 with its dis -
cussion of the environmental global governance field can facilitate sharing 
methods that work and do not work in one’s own research arena. This can 
be especially useful with regard to the “landscape of tensions” (Gustafsson 
and Lidskog 2018, 4) among multilayered governance, multiple levels of 
analysis, and cultural complications that exist in many global governance 
fields. Such dialogue can assist Internet governance researchers (and espe -
cially civil society research consumers) to get out ahead on complex pol -
icy issues. (Some have argued that industry, especially in the cybersecurity 
arena, is out in front of the rest, e.g., governments and civil society.)
Emerging Research Methods and Opportunities Ahead
Research methods developed for studying cross- cultural communication at 
the individual, team, and organizational levels can be useful in recognizing 
intercultural interactions in multistakeholder settings and related learning 
processes. Here there is scant research work on stakeholder, cross- cultural 
dialogue styles and stakeholder power- related strategies. Nor is there much 
work with a focus on gender. To measure these dimensions, studies out -
side the Internet governance field have used self- reported survey measures 
(Schneider and Heinecke 2019). Possible methods for analyzing these dimen -
sions for the Internet governance field are simulations, games, and experi -
ments. Another underexplored research arena is that of indigenous research 
methods. Such methods (Schneider and Heinecke 2019) could be powerful 
in studying collaborative processes such as those in which local communi -
ties are a part of codesign, coimplementation, or coevaluation.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  287
Internet governance research focuses on the emergent topic of platform 
governance (DeNardis and Hackl 2015; Gorwa 2019; Hein et al. 2016; Sch -
reieck et al. 2018). It primarily serves to frame, define, and raise important 
questions with regard to private sector technology- based platforms, includ -
ing social media platforms. Little attention has yet been paid to the meth -
ods we use for researching platform governance. See Jørgensen’s chapter 8 
for one useful example. Additionally, there are opportunities to study new 
blockchain technologies as governance platforms. Here there are exciting 
questions about how best to research blockchains as platform governance, 
including examinations of power within the blockchain.
There is new and relevant work in the public administration field on 
governance platforms (Ansell and Gash 2018; Ojo and Mellouli 2018). 
Unlike platform governance research, which focuses on actual private sec -
tor technology platforms (excluding blockchain, in which involvement 
goes beyond the private sector), the public- administration- based research 
on governance platforms focuses on nongovernment as well as govern -
ment involvement in governance networks. Ansell and Gash (2018, 19, 30) 
coined the term “governance platform,” inspired by the presence of plat -
form governance. Future work on platform governance, governance plat -
forms, and related research methods could also add to our understanding 
of norm development, another area of emerging importance in Internet 
governance locally and globally. Indeed, a dialogue between platform gov -
ernance and governance platform researchers could advance both research 
arena agendas.
As we study the path of Internet governance locally and globally, a 
question of long- term importance arises: How do societies develop what 
some have called dynamic resilience (Ansell and Trondal 2018; Fonseca, 
Lukosch, and Brazier 2019)? How do we study this? Certainly, we need a 
longitudinal dimension for such a study. Crises do and will emerge over 
time. (See research on Kondratieff curves and international affairs in Gold -
stein [1991].) What research methods, perhaps in combination with eco -
nomic analysis, might best fit this research question as it applies to the 
complex and dynamic field of Internet governance studies? On the basis of 
the work of Ansell and Trondal (2018), researchers can consider the follow -
ing approaches: observation, improvisation, conduct of experiments, track -
ing of networks, and tracing other interinstitutional arrangements through 
interviews, observation, and network analysis. Could researchers craft an 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025288 N. S. Levinson
index of societal dynamic resilience with regard to Internet governance? A 
focus on dynamic resilience could provide rich data, given complex emerg -
ing technologies such as artificial intelligence and robotics.
A concluding question relates to the funding of research and research 
methods. How does the pattern of funding for research questions (and 
research methodologies) shape, if at all, the portfolio of research frames 
(including disciplines and cross- disciplines) and approaches to be applied 
in the work ahead? Stone (2013) highlights the ways in which think tanks 
shape idea diffusion. What might be the road ahead for future funders of 
Internet governance research? And always mindful of ethics (see especially 
Hall, Madaan, and O’Hara’s chapter 6; Jardine’s chapter 7; and Ten Oever, 
Milan, and Beraldo’s chapter 10) and power (see especially Deibert’s chapter 
11), where might that road lead in terms of Internet governance research 
parameters, methods, and outcomes?
Note
1. Internet Governance Forum, accessed December 21, 2019, https:// www . intgov  
forum . org / multilingual /   .
References
Allan, B. B. (2017). Producing the climate: States, scientists, and the constitution of 
global governance objects. International Organization, 71 (1), 131– 162.
Ansell, C., & Gash, A. (2018). Collaborative platforms as a governance strategy. Jour-
nal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 28 (1), 16– 32.
Ansell, C., & Trondal, J. (2018). Governing turbulence: An organizational-  
institutional agenda. Perspectives on Public Management and Governance, 1 (1), 43– 57.
Apgar, J. M., Cohen, P. J., Ratner, B. D., deSilva, S., Buisson, M.- C., Longley, C., 
Bastakott, R. C., & Maedza, E. (2017). Identifying opportunities to improve gover -
nance of aquatic agricultural systems through participatory action research. Ecology 
and Society, 22 (1), 9.
Argote, L., & Miron- Spektor, E. (2011). Organizational learning: From experience to 
knowledge. Organization Science, 22 (5), 1123– 1137.
Baird, J., Plummer, R., & Bodin, O. (2016). Collaborative governance for climate 
change adaptation in Canada: Experimenting with adaptive co- management. 
Regional Environmental Change, 16 (3), 747– 758.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  289
Bovaird, T., Stoker, G., Jones, T., Loeffler, E., & Pinilla Roncancio, M. (2016). Activat -
ing collective co- production of public services: Influencing citizens to participate in 
complex governance mechanisms in the UK. International Review of Administrative 
Sciences, 82 (1), 47– 68.
Braman, S. (2011). The framing years: Policy fundamentals in the Internet design 
process, 1969– 1979. The Information Society, 2 , 295– 310.
Burt, R. S. (2009).  Structural holes: The social structure of competition . Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Busch, C., & Barkema, H. (2019). Social entrepreneurs as network orchestrators. In 
G. Gerard, T. Baker, P. Tracey, & H. Joshi, Handbook of inclusive innovation  (pp. 464–  
484). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Carrapico, H., & Farrand, B. (2017). Dialogue, partnership and empowerment for 
network and information security: The changing role of the private sector from 
objects of regulation to regulation shapers. Crime Law and Social Change, 67 , 245– 263.
Castells, M. (2007). Communication, power and counter- power in the network soci -
ety. International Journal of Communication, 1 , 238– 266.
Challies, E., Newig, J., Kochsk ämper, E., & Jager, N. W. (2017). Governance change 
and governance learning in Europe: Stakeholder participation in environmental 
policy implementation. Policy and Society, 36 (2), 288– 303.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on 
learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (1), 128– 152.
Craft, J., and Wilder, M. (2017). Catching a second wave: Context and compatibility 
in advisory system dynamics. Policy Studies Journal, 45 (1), 215– 239.
Crossan, M. M. (1998). Improvisation in action. Organization Science, 9 (5), 593– 599.
DeNardis, L. (2012). Hidden levers of Internet control. Information, Communication & 
Society, 15 (5), 720– 738.
DeNardis, L., & Hackl, A. M. (2015). Internet governance by social media platforms. 
Telecommunications Policy, 39 (9), 761– 770.
Dunlop, C. A., & Radaelli, C. M. (2013). Systematising policy learning: From mono -
lith to dimensions.  Political Studies, 61 (3), 599– 619.
Easterby- Smith, M., Lyles, M. A., & Tsang, E. W. K. (2008). Inter- organizational 
knowledge transfer: Current themes and future prospects. Journal of Management 
Studies, 45 (4), 677– 690.
Eggenschwiler, J. (2017). Accountability challenges confronting cyberspace gover -
nance. Internet Policy Review, 6 (3), 1– 11.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025290 N. S. Levinson
Epstein, D., Katzenbach, C., & Musiani, F. (2016). Doing Internet governance: How 
science and technology studies inform the study of Internet governance.  Internet 
Policy Review, 5 (3), 3– 14.
Finnemore, M., & Hollis, D. (2016). Constructing norms for global cybersecurity. 
American Journal of International Law, 110 (3), 425– 479.
Fishkin, J. S., Senges, M., Donahoe, E., Diamond, L., & Siu, A. (2018). Deliberative 
polling for multistakeholder Internet governance: Considered judgments on access 
for the next billion. Information, Communication & Society, 21 (11), 1541– 1554.
Fonseca, X., Lukosch, S., & Brazier, F. (2019). Social cohesion revisited: A new defi -
nition and how to characterize it. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science 
Research, 32 (2), 231– 253.
Galaz, V., Tallberg, J., Boin, A., Ituarte- Lima, C., Hey, E., Olsson, P., & Westley, F. 
(2017). Global governance dimensions of globally networked risks: The state of the 
art in social science research. Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy, 8 , 4– 27.
Goldstein, J. (1991). The possibility of cycles in international relations. International 
Studies Quarterly, 35 (4), 477– 480.
Gorwa, R. (2019). What is platform governance? Information, Communication & Soci -
ety, 22 (6), 854– 871.
Group of Seven. (2017, September 25– 26). G7 ICT and Industry Ministers’ declaration: 
Making the next production revolution inclusive, open and secure . Turin, Italy. Retrieved 
from http:// www . g7italy . it / sites / default / files / documents / G7%20ICT_Industry_Min  
isters_Declaration_%20Italy - 26%20Sept_2017final_0 / index . pdf
Gustafsson, K. M., & Lidskog, R. (2018). Boundary organizations and environmental 
governance: Performance, institutional design and conceptual development. Climate 
Risk Management, 19 , 2– 11.
Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. (1977). The population ecology of organizations. 
American Journal of Sociology, 82 (5), 929– 964.
Head, B. W. (2016). Toward more evidence- informed policy making? Public Adminis -
tration Review, 76 (3), 472– 484.
Hein, A., Schreieck, M., Wiesche, M., & Krcmar, H. (2016, March). Multiple- case 
analysis on governance mechanisms of multi- sided platforms . Paper presented at Mul -
tikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik, Ilmenau, Germany.
Henry, A. D. (2011). Ideology, power, and the structure of policy networks. Policy Stud -
ies Journal, 39 (3), 361– 383.
Hofstede, G. (1983). National cultures in four dimensions: A research- based theory 
of cultural differences among nations. International Studies of Management & Organi -
zation, 13 (1– 2), 46– 74.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  291
Howlett, M., Mukherjee, I., & Koppenjan, J. (2017). Policy learning and policy net -
works in theory and practice: The role of policy brokers in the Indonesian biodiesel 
policy network. Policy and Society, 36 (2), 233– 250.
Jeffares, S., & Skelcher, C. (2008). Democratic subjectivities in network governance: Using 
web- enabled Q- methodology with European public managers . Paper presented at the 
Annual Conference Group for Public Administration, Erasmus University, Rotter -
dam, Netherlands.
Kamkhaji, J. C., & Radaelli, C. M. (2017). Democratic subjectivities in network 
governance: Crisis, learning and policy change in the European Union. Journal of 
European Public Policy, 24 (5), 714– 734.
Katzenbach, C., Hofmann, J., Gollatz, K., Musiani, F., Epstein, D., DeNardis, L., 
Hackl, A., & Blanchette, J. F. (2015, October). Doing Internet governance: STS- informed 
perspectives on ordering the net . Paper presented at the 16th Annual Meeting of Inter -
net Researchers, Phoenix, Arizona.
Kellogg Foundation. (2004). Logic model development guide: Using logic models to bring 
together planning, evaluation, and action . Retrieved from https:// www . bttop . org / sites  
/ default / files / public / W . K . %20Kellogg%20LogicModel . pdf
Klein, H. (2002). ICANN and Internet governance: Leveraging technical coordina -
tion to realize global public policy. The Information Society, 18 (3), 193– 207.
Kleinw ächter, W. (2000). ICANN between technical mandate and political chal -
lenges. Telecommunications Policy, 24 (6– 7), 553– 563.
Krahmann, E. (2017). Legitimizing private actors in global governance: From perfor -
mance to performativity.  Politics and Governance, 5 (1), 54– 62.
Lambright, W. H. (1976). Governing science and technology . New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press.
Leach, W. D., Weible, C. M., Vince, S. R., Siddiki, S. N., & Calanni, J. C. (2013). Fos -
tering learning through collaboration: Knowledge acquisition and belief change in 
marine aquaculture partnerships. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 
24(3), 591– 622.
Levinson, N. S. (2012). Ecologies of representation: Knowledge, networks, & inno -
vation in Internet governance. Paper presented at the American Political Science 
Association annual meeting. Available at https:// ssrn . com / abstract =2108671
Levinson, N. S. (2015). A tri- decennia view of knowledge transfer research: What 
works in diffusion and development contexts. Journal of International Communica -
tion, 21 (2), 153– 168.
Levinson, N. S., & Marzouki, M. (2016). IOs and global Internet governance interor -
ganizational architecture. In F. Musiani, D. Cogburn, L. DeNardis, & N. S. Levinson 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025292 N. S. Levinson
(Eds.), The turn to infrastructure in Internet governance  (pp. 47– 72). New York, NY: 
Palgrave.
Lewis, J. M. (2011). The future of network governance research: Strength in diversity 
and synthesis. Public Administration, 89 , 1221– 1234.
McFadgen, B., & Huitema, D. (2017). Are all experiments created equal? A frame -
work for analysis of the learning potential of policy experiments in environmental 
governance. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 60 (10), 1765– 1784.
Moyson, S. (2017). Cognition and policy change: The consistency of policy learning 
in the advocacy coalition framework. Policy and Society, 36 (2), 320– 344.
Moyson, S., Scholten, P., & Weible, C. M. (2017). Policy learning and policy change: 
Theorizing their relations from different perspectives. Policy and Society, 36 (2), 161– 177.
Musiani, F., Cogburn, D., DeNardis, L., & Levinson, N. S. (Eds.). (2016). The turn to 
infrastructure in Internet governance . New York, NY: Palgrave.
Newig, J., G ünther, D., & Pahl- Wostl, C. (2010). Synapses in the network: Learning 
in governance networks in the context of environmental management. Ecology and 
Society, 15 (4), 24.
Newig, J., Kochsk ämper, E., Challies, E., & Jager, N. W. (2016). Exploring governance 
learning: How policymakers draw on evidence, experience and intuition in design -
ing participatory flood risk planning. Environmental Science & Policy, 55 , 353– 360.
Nwagwu, W. E., & Iheanatu, O. (2011). Use of scientific information sources by poli -
cymakers in the science and technology sector of Nigeria. African Journal of Library, 
Archives & Information Science, 21 (1), 59– 71.
Nye, J. S. (2014). The regime complex for managing global cyber activities . Global Com -
mission on Internet Governance Paper Series (Paper no. 1). Centre for International 
Governance Innovation/Chatham House. Retrieved from https:// www . cigionline  
. org / sites / default / files / gcig_paper_no1 . pdf
Ojo, A., & Mellouli, S. (2018). Deploying governance networks for societal chal -
lenges. Government Information Quarterly, 35 (4), S106– S112.
Or, N. H., & Aranda- Jan, A. C. (2017). The dynamic role of state and nonstate actors: 
Governance after global financial crisis. Policy Studies Journal, 45 (S1).
Pahl- Wostl, C. (2009). A conceptual framework for analyzing adaptive capacity and 
multi- level learning processes in resource governance regimes. Global Environmental 
Change, 19 , 354– 365.
Provan, K. G., & Kenis, P. N. (2008). Modes of network governance: Structure, man -
agement and effectiveness. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 18 (2), 
229– 252.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Toward Future Internet Governance Research and Methods  293
Provan, K. G., & Lemaire, R. H. (2012). Core concepts and key ideas for understand -
ing public sector organizational networks: Using research to inform scholarship and 
practice. Public Administration Review, 72 (5), 638– 648.
Raab, J., Mannak, R. S., & Cambr é, B. (2013). Combining structure, governance, 
and context: A configurational approach to network effectiveness. Journal of Public 
Administration Research and Theory, 25 (2), 479– 511.
Raymond, M., & DeNardis, L. (2015). Multistakeholderism: Anatomy of an inchoate 
global institution. International Theory, 7 (3), 572– 616.
Reagans, R. (2011). Close encounters: Analyzing how social similarity and propin -
quity contribute to strong network connections. Organization Science, 22 (4), 835– 849.
Rogers, E. (1962). Diffusion of innovations . New York, NY: Free Press.
Ruggie, J. G. (2001). Global governance net: The global compact as learning net -
work. Global Governance, 7 (4), 371– 378.
Rutherford, K. R. (2000). The evolving arms control agenda: Implications of the role 
of NGOS in banning antipersonnel landmines. World Politics, 53 (1), 74– 114.
Schneider, S., & Heinecke, L. (2019). The need to transform science communication 
from being multicultural via cross- cultural to intercultural. Advances in Geosciences, 
46, 11– 19.
Schreieck, M., Hein, A., Wiesche, M., & Krcmar, H. (2018). The challenge of govern -
ing digital platform ecosystems. In C. Linnhoff- Popien, R. Schneider, & M. Zaddach 
(Eds.), Digital marketplaces unleashed  (pp. 527– 538). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Spekkink, W. A., & Boons, F. A. (2015). The emergence of collaborations. Journal of 
Public Administration Research and Theory, 26 (4), 613– 630.
Steijn, B., Klijn, E., & Edelenbos, J. (2011). Public private partnerships: Added value 
by organizational form or management?  Public Administration, 89 (4), 1235– 1252.
Stone, D. (2013).  Knowledge actors and transnational governance: The private- public 
policy nexus in the global agora . London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stone, D. (2019). Transnational policy entrepreneurs and the cultivation of influ -
ence: Individuals, organizations and their networks. Globalizations, 16(2), 1– 17. 
Szulanski, G. (2002). Sticky knowledge: Barriers to knowing in the firm . New York, NY: Sage.
van Eeten, M. (2017). Patching security governance: An empirical view of emergent 
governance mechanisms for cybersecurity.  Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, 
19(6), 429– 448.
Visser, M., & van der Togt, K. (2016). Learning in public sector organizations: A 
theory of action approach. Public Organization Review, 16 (2), 235– 249.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025294 N. S. Levinson
Weber, E. P., & Khademian, A. M. (2008). Wicked problems, knowledge challenges, 
and collaborative capacity builders in network settings. Public Administration Review, 
68(2): 334– 349.
Weible, C. M., & Carter, D. P. (2017). Advancing policy process research at its over -
lap with public management scholarship and nonprofit and voluntary action stud -
ies. Policy Studies Journal, 45 (1), 22– 49.
Weible, C. M., Sabatier, P.A., & McQueen, K. (2009). Themes and variations: Taking 
stock of the Advocacy Coalition Framework. Policy Studies Journal, 37 (1), 121– 140.
Weiss, C. (1979). The many meanings of research utilization. Public Administration 
Review, 39 (5), 426– 431.
Wurzel, R., Liefferink, D., & Tomey, D. (2019). Pioneers, leaders and followers in 
multilevel and polycentric climate governance. Environmental Politics, 28 (1), 1– 21.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Laura DeNardis  is an author and professor and is globally recognized as one of the 
most read scholars in Internet governance. She is a tenured Professor in the School 
of Communication at American University in Washington, DC, where she serves 
as Faculty Director of the Internet Governance Lab. In 2018, she was the recipient 
of American University’s highest faculty award, Scholar- Teacher of the Year. Her 
six books include The Internet in Everything: Freedom and Security in a World with No 
Off Switch  (Yale University Press, 2020),  The Global War for Internet Governance  (Yale 
University Press, 2014), Opening Standards: The Global Politics of Interoperability  (MIT 
Press, 2011), and Protocol Politics: The Globalization of Internet Governance  (MIT Press, 
2009). With a background in information engineering and a doctorate in science 
and technology studies (STS), she studies the social and political implications of 
Internet technical architecture and governance. She is an affiliated fellow of the 
Yale Law School Information Society Project and served as its Executive Director 
from 2008 to 2011. She is also currently a Senior Fellow at the Columbia University 
School of International and Public Affairs. Her expertise and scholarship have been 
featured in Science Magazine , the Economist , the New York Times , Time , Christian Sci -
ence Monitor , Slate, Forbes , the Atlantic , and the Wall Street Journal , on National Public 
Radio , and by Reuters, among others. She holds an engineering science degree from 
Dartmouth College, an MEng from Cornell University, a PhD in science and tech -
nology studies from Virginia Tech, and she was awarded a postdoctoral fellowship 
from Yale Law School.
Derrick L. Cogburn  is a tenured professor at American University in Washington, 
DC. He has a joint appointment in the School of International Service, where he 
serves in the International Communication and International Development Pro -
grams, and in the Kogod School of Business, where he serves in the Department of 
Information Technology and Analytics. He also serves as the founding Executive 
Director of the AU Institute on Disability and Public Policy and is a Faculty Director 
of the Internet Governance Lab. He directs the Center for Research on Collabora -
tories and Technology Enhanced Learning Communities (COTELCO), an award- 
winning social science research collaboratory investigating the social and technical Editors
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025296 Editors
factors that influence geographically distributed collaborative knowledge work, partic -
ularly between developed and developing countries. His research and teaching also 
includes global information and communication technology and socioeconomic 
development, multistakeholder institutional mechanisms for Internet governance, 
and transnational policy networks and epistemic communities. He has published 
in major journals such as Telecommunications Policy , International Studies Perspectives , 
Journal of International Affairs , Assistive Technology , and Information Technologies and 
International Development . He has published with or advised the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, UN World Institute for Development Economics Research, 
World Bank, UNESCO, International Telecommunication Union, and UN Economic 
Commission for Africa. He has served as principal investigator or co– principal investi -
gator in externally supported research of over $11 million, with grants from sources 
as diverse as the National Science Foundation, US Department of Education, JPMor -
gan Chase, Microsoft Research, the W. K. Kellogg Foundation, and the Nippon Foun -
dation. He is editor of the Palgrave Macmillan book series Information Technology 
and Global Governance. He is past president of the Information Technology and 
Politics section of the American Political Science Association and past president of 
the International Communication section of the International Studies Association. 
He is a founding member and past vice chair of the Global Internet Governance Aca -
demic Network. He holds a bachelor’s degree from the University of Oklahoma, and 
master’s and doctoral degrees from Howard University. @derrickcogburn
Nanette S. Levinson  is a faculty director of the Internet Governance Lab and a ten -
ured faculty member in the School of International Service (SIS) at American Uni -
versity, where she served as Associate Dean from 1988 to 2005 and from 2015 to 
2018. She also serves as Academic Director of the SIS/Sciences- Po Exchange Pro -
gram. Her research and teaching focus on Internet and global governance, includ -
ing knowledge transfer and innovation in complex, cross- national, cross- cultural, 
and cross- organizational systems (such as online settings). She has studied Internet 
governance since the early days of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers and has been involved in research collaborations with colleagues in 
France, in Japan, and at American University. She served as the first elected chair 
of the Global Internet Governance Academic Network. Her leadership positions 
also include first woman chair of the National Conference on the Advancement of 
Research, cofounder of the American Society for Public Administration’s section on 
Government and Business, and past president/chair of both the International Stud -
ies Association’s International Communication section and the American Political 
Science Association’s Information Technology and Politics section. Additionally, she 
founded and serves as cochair of the Hawaii International Conference on Systems 
Science’s Digital and Social Media Minitrack on Culture, Identity, and Inclusion. 
Recipient of awards including those for outstanding teaching, program develop -
ment, honors programming, academic affairs administration, and multicultural 
affairs, she has designed cocurricular collaborative learning opportunities on campus 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Editors  297
and research- based training programs for the private and public sectors. In 2011, the 
Ashoka Foundation presented her with its Award for Outstanding Contributions to 
Social Entrepreneurship Education. She received her bachelors, masters, and doctor -
ate degrees from Harvard University.
Francesca Musiani  (PhD, socioeconomics of innovation, MINES ParisTech, 2012), 
has been Associate Research Professor at the French National Center for Scientific 
Research (CNRS) since 2014. She is Deputy Director of the Center for Internet and 
Society of CNRS, which she cofounded in 2019. She is also an associate researcher 
at the Center for the Sociology of Innovation (i3/MINES ParisTech) and a Global 
Fellow at the Internet Governance Lab of American University in Washington, DC. 
Since 2006 her research work has focused on Internet governance, in an interdis -
ciplinary perspective that merges information and communication sciences, sci -
ence and technology studies (STS), and international law. Her most recent research 
explores the development and use of encryption technologies in secure messaging 
(European Commission’s Horizon 2020 project NEXTLEAP, 2016– 2018), digital 
resistances to censorship and surveillance in the Russian Internet (French National 
Research Agency, or ANR, project ResisTIC, 2018– 2021), and the governance of web 
archives (ANR project Web90, 2014– 2017 and CNRS Attentats- Recherche project 
ASAP, 2016). Her theoretical work explores STS approaches to Internet governance, 
with particular attention paid to socio- technical controversies and to governance by 
architecture and by infrastructure. Her most recent book is Qu’est- ce qu’une archive du 
Web?  (What is a web archive?, OpenEdition Press, 2019), with C. Paloque- Bergès, V. 
Schafer, and B. Thierry, recipient of the OpenEdition Books Select distinction. She 
is academic editor for Internet Policy Review . She is vice president for research of the 
Internet Society France. Since 2017, she has cochaired the Communication Policy and 
Technology section of the International Association for Media and Communication 
Research, after having led its emerging scholars network (2012– 2016). @franmusiani / 
https://cis.cnrs.fr/francesca-musiani
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Farzaneh Badiei  is a research scholar at Yale Law School, leading the Social Media Gov -
ernance Initiative. Prior to that she was a research associate at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology, School of Public Policy, and the Executive Director of the Internet Gov -
ernance Project. For nearly a decade, she has been a part of the Internet governance 
research and professional community. She has conducted research at the Humboldt 
Institute for Internet and Society and the Syracuse School of Information Studies. She 
received her PhD from the University of Hamburg, Institute of Law and Economics.
Davide Beraldo  is a postdoctoral researcher in the DATACTIVE and ALEX projects, 
and a Lecturer in New Media and Digital Culture at the Department of Media Stud -
ies, University of Amsterdam. He holds a PhD (cum laude) in sociology from the Uni -
versity of Amsterdam and the University of Milan, and a master (cum laude) in social 
sciences. He is currently working on investigating political biases in recommenda -
tion systems of popular social media and on developing a Social Movement Studies 
framework for the conceptualization of data activism. In his PhD dissertation, he 
explored the epistemological and methodological implications of the digital media -
tion of social movements, investigating large datasets of social media data related to 
the Occupy and Anonymous protest movements. He has a background in computer 
programming and has worked as a freelance developer and consultant for political 
and market research agencies. His research interests include digital sociology, social 
movements, algorithms, online networks, and epistemology of complexity.
Sandra Braman  is Professor of Communication and Abbott Professor of Liberal Arts 
at Texas A&M University. Her books include Change of State: Information, Policy, and 
Power  (currently undergoing revision for a second edition) and the edited volumes 
Biotechnology and Communication: The Meta- technologies of Information ; The Emerging 
Global Information Policy Regime ; and Communication Researchers and Policy- Making , 
and she has written almost 100 scholarly journal articles and book chapters. She is 
editor of the Information Policy Series at MIT Press and Fellow of the International 
Communication Association. She is former chair of the Communication Law and 
Policy Division of the International Communication Association and former head 
of the Law Section of the International Association of Media and Communication Contributors
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025300 Contributors
Research. Her research has been funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Founda -
tion, Soros Foundation, and the US National Science Foundation.
Ronald J. Deibert  is Professor of Political Science and Director of the Citizen Lab 
at the Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy, University of Toronto. The 
Citizen Lab undertakes interdisciplinary research at the intersection of global secu -
rity, information and communication technologies, and human rights. The research 
outputs of the Citizen Lab are routinely covered in global media, including over two 
dozen reports receiving front page coverage in the New York Times , Washington Post , 
and other media over the last decade. He is the author of Black Code: Surveillance, 
Privacy, and the Dark Side of the Internet  (Random House, 2013) and numerous books, 
chapters, articles, and reports on Internet censorship, surveillance, and cybersecurity. 
In 2013 he was appointed to the Order of Ontario and awarded the Queen Eliza -
beth II Diamond Jubilee medal, for being “among the first to recognize and take mea -
sures to mitigate growing threats to communications rights, openness and security 
worldwide.”
Wendy Hall , DBE, FRS, FREng, is Regius Professor of Computer Science at the Uni -
versity of Southampton, UK, and an executive director of the Web Science Institute 
at Southampton. Her influence as one of the first to undertake serious research in 
multimedia and hypermedia has been significant in many areas, including digital 
libraries, the development of the Semantic Web, and the emerging discipline of web 
science. She became a Dame Commander of the British Empire in 2009 and is a 
fellow of the Royal Society. She has been president of the Association for Comput -
ing Machinery, senior vice president of the Royal Academy of Engineering, and a 
member of the UK Prime Minister’s Council for Science and Technology. She was 
a founding member of the European Research Council and chair of the European 
Commission’s Information Society Technologies Advisory Group, a member of the 
Global Commission on Internet Governance, and a member of the World Economic 
Forum’s Global Futures Council on the Digital Economy. Dame Wendy was cochair 
of the UK government’s review of artificial intelligence, Growing the Artificial Intel -
ligence Industry in the UK  (2017), and became the UK government’s first Skills Cham -
pion for AI in the UK in 2018.
Jeanette Hofmann  is a political scientist with a focus on Internet regulation. At the 
WZB Berlin Social Science Center she heads the research group Politics of Digitaliza -
tion, which studies how today’s societies make sense of and shape the digital transfor -
mation. The group examines processes of digitalization both as a resource of political 
governance (regulation through digitalization) and as an object of political decision-  
making (regulation of digitalization). She is Professor of Internet Politics at the Freie 
Universit ät Berlin, Director and Founder of the Berlin- based Alexander von Humboldt 
Institute for Internet and Society, and principal investigator at the newly founded 
Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society. At the latter institute, she heads 
two research groups, one on digitalization and democracy and one on quantification 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Contributors  301
and regulation. Her two current research foci are platform governance and democratic 
change. In addition to her academic work, she has been involved in various political 
processes such as the UN World Summit on the Information Society and the Inter -
net Governance Forum on the international level and, as an expert member, in the 
Internet and Digital Society committee of inquiry of the German Parliament on the 
national level. At present she is a member of the expert group to the EU Observatory 
on the Online Platform Economy. She also heads two national academic expert com -
missions, one on digitalization and democracy (Academy of Sciences Leopoldina) and 
one on youth engagement in the digital age (German government).
Eric Jardine  is an assistant professor of political science at Virginia Tech and a fellow 
at the Centre for International Governance Innovation. His research focuses on the 
uses and abuses of the Dark Web, the measurement of trends in cybercrime data, 
and the politics surrounding anonymity- granting technologies and encryption. His 
work has been published in a number of peer- reviewed outlets, including New Media 
& Society , International Journal of Drug Policy , Journal of Cyber Policy , First Monday , Intel-
ligence and National Security , Terrorism and Political Violence , and Studies in Conflict and 
Terrorism . He is the coauthor, with Fen Hampson, of Look Who’s Watching: Surveil -
lance, Treachery and Trust Online  (CIGI/MQUP, 2017).
Rikke Frank Jørgensen  is a Senior Researcher at the Danish Institute for Human Rights 
in Copenhagen. Her research focuses on the intersection between human rights and 
technology and covers issues such as the role of private actors in the online domain, 
Internet users’ human rights, and Internet regulation and governance. Besides her 
scholarly activities, she has served as an adviser to the Danish government, partici -
pated in the Council of Europe’s Committee on Human Rights for Internet Users, 
and been closely involved in civil society networks such as European Digital Rights. 
Her most recent book (as editor), Human Rights in the Age of Platforms  (MIT Press, 
2019) examines the human rights implications of the social web, through the lens of 
datafication, platforms, and human rights regulation.
Aastha Madaan  is a senior data scientist in the Advanced Digital Engineering group 
at Arup, London. She is responsible for leading the technical delivery of data- driven 
products and analytical and machine learning projects for the aviation, infrastruc -
ture, and cities sectors. She is a visiting research fellow at the School of Electronics 
and Computer Science, University of Southampton, working on design of a data 
sharing infrastructure for cognitive IoT ecosystems. Previously she worked as a 
research fellow at the University of Southampton on research problems and design 
of an IoT test bed for secure data sharing, innovation, privacy, and data security. She 
received her PhD in computer science from the Database Laboratory at the Univer -
sity of Aizu, Fukushima, Japan, in 2014 and has a master’s degree in computer sci -
ence from the University of Delhi, India (2006– 2008). Her research interests include 
data innovation in cognitive IoT, data science, and emerging technologies such as 
edge computing and artificial intelligence.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025302 Contributors
Stefania Milan  (stefaniamilan . net) is Associate Professor of New Media and Digital 
Culture at the University of Amsterdam. Her research explores the intersection of 
digital technology, governance, and activism, with emphasis on critical data prac -
tices and autonomous infrastructure. She enjoys creating bridges between research, 
activism, and policy making, and is passionate about methodological innovation. 
Her work has received funding from, among others, the European Research Council 
and the Dutch Research Council (NWO). Stefania holds a PhD in political and social 
sciences from the European University Institute. Prior to joining the University of 
Amsterdam, she worked at the Citizen Lab (University of Toronto), Tilburg Univer -
sity, Central European University, the University of Lucerne (Switzerland), and the 
Robert Schuman Center for Advanced Studies at the European University Institute. 
Stefania is the author of Social Movements and Their Technologies: Wiring Social Change  
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2013) and coauthor of Media/Society  (Sage, 2011). In 2019, she 
coedited a special issue of the journal Policy and Internet  dedicated to Internet Infra -
structure and Human Rights. As a digital rights advocate, she has been vocal in Inter -
net governance and cybersecurity circles.
Milton L. Mueller  is Professor in the School of Public Policy at the Georgia Insti -
tute of Technology. He is an internationally prominent scholar specializing in the 
political economy of information and communication. The author of seven books 
and scores of journal articles, his work informs public policy, science and technol -
ogy studies, law, economics, communications, and international studies. His books 
Will the Internet Fragment? Sovereignty, Globalization and Cyberspace  (Polity, 2017), 
Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance  (MIT Press, 2010), and 
Ruling the Root: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace  (MIT Press, 2002) are 
acclaimed scholarly accounts of the global governance regime emerging around the 
Internet. He is the cofounder and director of the Internet Governance Project, which 
has played a prominent role in shaping global Internet policies and institutions such 
as ICANN and the Internet Governance Forum. He has participated in proceedings 
and policy development activities of ICANN, the International Telecommunication 
Union, and the US National Telecommunications and Information Administra -
tion (NTIA) and regulatory proceedings of the European Commission, China, Hong 
Kong, and New Zealand. He has served as an expert witness in prominent legal cases 
related to domain names and telecommunication policy. He was elected to the Advi -
sory Committee of the American Registry for Internet Numbers from 2013 to 2016 
and appointed in 2014 to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Stewardship 
Coordination Group. He helped create the Global Internet Governance Academic 
Network, an international association of scholars focused on Internet governance.
Kieron O’Hara  is an associate professor in electronics and computer science at the 
University of Southampton, UK. His interests are in the philosophy and politics of 
digital modernity, particularly the World Wide Web; key themes are trust, privacy, 
and ethics. He is the author of several books on technology and politics; the lat -
est, with Nigel Shadbolt, David De Roure, and Wendy Hall,  The Theory and Practice 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Contributors  303
of Social Machines  (Springer), appeared in 2019. He has also written extensively on 
political philosophy and British politics. He is one of the leads on the UK Anonymi -
sation Network (UKAN), which disseminates best practice in data anonymization.
Niels ten Oever  is a PhD candidate with the DATACTIVE Research Group at the 
Department of Media Studies, University of Amsterdam, and affiliated with its Politi -
cal Science Department. His research focuses on how values, like human rights, are 
inscribed in the Internet infrastructure through its transnational governance. He 
seeks to understand how invisible infrastructures provide a socio- technical ordering 
to our societies and how that might influence the distribution of wealth, power, and 
possibilities. Prior to starting his PhD, he worked as Head of Digital for the international 
freedom of expression not- for- profit ARTICLE19, where he designed, fundraised, and 
set up the digital program that covered the Internet Engineering Task Force, the 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, the Institute for Electrical 
and Electronic Engineers, and the International Telecommunication Union. He also 
designed and implemented freedom of expression projects with Free Press Unlimited. 
He holds a cum laude MA in philosophy from the University of Amsterdam.
Rolf H. Weber  is Professor of International Business Law at Zurich University; there 
he acts as codirector of the Center for Information Technology, Society, and Law and 
as codirector of the Blockchain Center. Furthermore, he is practicing attorney in one 
of the largest independent Swiss law firms in Zurich. From 2000 to 2015 he was Visit -
ing Professor at the University of Hong Kong. He is a member of the editorial boards 
of several Swiss and international legal periodicals, a member of SIEL/AIELN from 
their beginnings, and a member of the European Dialogue on Internet Governance. 
He is fluent in German, English, and French. His main fields of research and practice 
are IT and the Internet, international business competition, and international trade 
and finance law. He publishes and speaks regularly on Internet- related legal issues.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Absorptive capacity, 272–273, 284–285
Academia, 34, 116, 138, 215, 249, 254, 
257, 281
academic disciplines (silos), 232, 247
science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) subjects, 233
Access, vii, 3, 5, 9, 10, 13, 40, 71, 94, 97, 
125, 128–131, 13
to fieldwork/data/archives, 98, 223, 
239–240
Internet, 128, 136
to knowledge (A2K), 70
personal contact to fieldwork, 
171–172
Accessibility, 5, 61, 114, 203, 207. See 
also Dynamic coalitions: Dynamic 
Coalition on Accessibility and Dis -
ability (DCAD)
Accountability, 43, 73, 90, 95, 105, 109, 
114–117, 132, 220, 224, 242, 258, 
281
Actors, 3–4, 6, 64–65, 93–94, 114, 129, 
215, 256, 262
bridging, 272, 273, 278
brokers, 278
malicious, 150–151
nonhuman, 85–87, 89–90, 218
nonstate, 66–67, 109, 263, 270, 276, 
283
private, 177–181
state, 108–109, 138–139, 269–270, 281Advanced Research Projects Agency  
Network (ARPANET), 59
Advocacy coalition framework (ACF), 279
Agreements, 107
bilateral, 107
multilateral, 107
Analysis. See Network(ing): social net -
work analysis (SNA); Discourse(s): 
discourse analysis
archival, 132, 279
document, 279, 280
levels, 109, 270, 273, 285
Anonymity, 5, 41, 223
Apple, 9
Application programming interface 
(API), 134, 187
Archive, 171
email archives, 187, 220–221, 223, 238
web archives, 134–135
Artifact, 87–88, 94, 95, 255
Artificial intelligence, 124, 200, 241, 288
China’s Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Development Plan, 241
Autonomous networks, 13, 33, 46
Autonomous systems, 28, 41, 46
Autonomy (of law), 107
BigBang (software), 220–223
Big data, 163, 240
3 Vs of Big Data, 187
big data analytics, 187–188, 207Index
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025306 Index
Bildt, Carl, 13
Bitcoin, 9, 93, 95–96
Blockchain, 41, 93, 95, 97, 287
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), 28–29, 
39
Business Action in Support of the Infor -
mation Society (BASIS), 196
International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC), 196
Canada, 38, 239, 243, 248
protection of Public Participation Act 
(PPPA), 239
strategic litigation against public par -
ticipation (SLAP), 239
Capacity, 198–201, 234–236, 264
Cardoso Report, 257
Case study (methodology), 191, 259, 
269, 273, 280
Censorship, 1, 3, 6, 10, 17, 39, 62, 69, 
176–178, 233, 238–239, 241–242
internet filtering, 69
Champion, 274
Change, 126, 281, 282
change logic, 284
incremental, 26, 49
radical, 26, 152
social, 106–107
China, 6, 17–18, 73, 131, 176, 201,  
238
agreement with the United States on 
computer espionage, 235
information controls, 238
Jinping, Xi (President), 235
Next Generation Artificial Intelligence 
Development Plan, 241
Citizen Lab, 69, 234, 238
global analysis of internet filtering by 
states, 69
Hacking Team, threatened legal action 
against, 238–239
Netsweeper, legal action against,  
239Sandvine, threatened legal action 
against, 238–239
University of Toronto, 239
Citizenship, 28–29, 36, 39, 41, 241
networked, 46–47
Civil liberties, 1, 5, 7, 11, 26–27, 35, 39, 
44, 47, 96, 213
Civil society, 110, 113–114, 116, 118, 
126, 253–254, 257, 259, 262, 274, 
281, 286
digital espionage/attacks against, 
234–236
Climate change, 118, 283
Cognitive psychology, 275, 285
Collaboration, 219–221, 242, 248, 259, 
262–263
co–processes, 132, 254, 273
participatory, 259, 276
Community, 127, 135, 138–139, 220, 
231, 243, 262–264
Complex adaptive systems theory, 30
Complexity, 42, 90, 99, 106, 137, 163, 
189, 259, 283
Computational propaganda, 185.  
See also  Fake news
Computer Assisted Qualitative Data 
Analysis Software (CAQDAS), 189, 
190
Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT), 243
Carnegie Mellon University, 243
Computer science, 2, 12–13, 74, 98, 
215–216, 232–233
Consensus, 93, 98, 112, 114–115, 220, 
231, 263, 265
Consent, 35, 137, 223, 258
Content, 4, 5–6, 10, 16, 39, 43, 62, 
68–70, 95, 125, 175, 178–179
regulation (of), 69, 169, 179
restriction, 7, 36
Content delivery networks (CDNs), 7
Context, 105, 111, 114–116, 118
context-oriented approach, 170
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Index  307
Contract, 10, 25, 62, 64, 71, 73, 106, 
116, 118, 169, 245, 280
terms of service, 3–4, 15–16, 169, 178, 
181
Controversy, 85, 93–94, 98, 173, 244
negotiation, 98, 213, 220, 259
re-alignment, 93
stabilization, 89, 93
Coordination, 3–4, 7, 8, 29, 30, 63, 64, 
88, 114, 133, 217, 220, 253, 256, 279
Co-production, 12, 254, 284
Corporations, 13, 27, 33, 38, 40, 42, 65, 
127, 130, 180–181, 216. See also  Pri-
vate sector
Cross-Industry Standard Process for 
Data Mining (CRISP-DM), 192
Culture, 21, 63, 86, 123, 175, 219, 243, 
271–272, 285
cultural factors, 115
culture kaleidoscope, 271
Cybercrime/cybercriminals, 44, 147, 
148, 150, 151, 152, 162
Cybernetics, 106
Cybersecurity, 1, 3, 7–9, 13, 17, 22, 30, 
37, 38, 41, 63, 71, 73, 75, 147, 149, 
156, 157, 159, 185, 188, 189, 234, 
241, 280–281
NIST Cybersecurity Framework, 186, 
188, 189, 192, 194, 201, 203–207
Cyberspace, 9, 11, 47, 60–62, 68, 69, 71, 
75, 105, 281
Daemon, 24, 43, 45–46
Data, 7, 40, 69, 73, 91, 94, 99, 123, 137, 
240, 284
accuracy, 222
analytics, 128, 133, 136, 187, 207–208
breaches, 1, 9, 147–148, 151, 158–159, 
163
collection, 37, 72, 126, 130, 163, 169, 
170–172, 176, 192–193, 278
flows, 59, 118, 138, 146, 213, 215
localization, 6, 7, 73, 131open, 128–130, 133–134
owners, 127, 129, 134
sets, 132, 240
source, 188, 214, 220
Database, 6, 41, 64, 74, 205, 215, 216
Deep packet inspection, 92, 238
Democracy, 9, 17, 33, 67, 91, 258, 260, 
262, 264–265
Desai, Nitin, 280
Design, 3, 4–5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 16, 22, 24, 
26, 28, 36–37, 45–46, 59, 89, 91, 93, 
95–96, 124, 151, 156, 213, 233, 236, 
284
Dialogue, 91, 99, 111, 114, 115, 117, 
261–264, 274, 280, 286–287
Digitization, 27, 38, 110, 149, 161
Discourse(s), 1, 8, 17, 87, 89, 170, 181, 
214, 254–255
discourse analysis, 170, 222, 254–255, 
260, 265, 276, 284
Discursive frame, 170
Discursive layer of Internet governance, 
218
Document analysis, 213, 279. See also  
Analysis: document
Domain Name System (DNS), 4, 36, 63, 
70, 73, 180, 261
Security Extensions (DNSSEC), 216
Dynamic coalitions, 207, 208
Dynamic Coalition on Accessibility 
and Disability (DCAD), 207
Economics, 7, 12, 61, 69, 70, 74, 75, 88, 
99, 123, 150, 233, 248
biases in information security 
research, 237
(of) information security, 69
negative incentives, 234, 237, 242, 
244, 246
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), 
248
Encryption, 3, 5, 9, 10, 14, 17, 37, 72, 
238, 245
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025308 Index
Engaged research, 214, 224
Engineer(s), 5, 213, 215, 236
Environmental governance, 274, 276–278
Environmental policy, 254
Ethics, 111, 124, 129, 283, 288
ethical challenges, 214, 286, 288
Ethnography, 218
European Union, 6, 131, 272, 276, 277
General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR), 6, 73, 131–132, 139
right to be forgotten, 6, 70, 73, 131
Experimental methods, 216, 277–278, 
286
Facebook, 27, 42, 65, 70, 90, 124,  
169–173, 176–179, 240
Libra (Facebook-promoted cryptocur -
rency), 27, 42
Fake news, 130, 189, 201. See also  Com -
putational propaganda
Fieldwork, 98
Forest Stewardship Council, 256
Fragmentation, 13, 18, 110, 118, 217, 
271
Internet, 139, 217
legal, 118
Framing, 73, 169–170, 173, 178,  
180–181, 257
Freedom of expression, 1, 35, 94, 146, 
169, 178–179, 181, 201
Funding (research), 248, 288
Games, 45, 286
Game theory, 117
Gender, 116, 123, 197, 222, 272, 286
Geography, 32, 114
Geopolitics (and geopolitical gover -
nance), 1, 10, 34, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 
47, 75, 116, 123, 125, 130
GhostNet, 234
GitHub, 222
Global Commission on Internet Gover -
nance, 13Global Internet Governance Academic 
Network (GigaNet), 2, 12, 68
Globalization, 35, 59, 108, 257–258
Global legal pluralism, 111, 119
Global Network Initiative (GNI), 178
Global Reporting Initiative, 256
Google, 65, 70, 90, 99, 125, 155–156, 
169–173, 176–180, 185, 240
Governance, 126–130, 135. See also  
Learning: governance
collaborative, 278–279
decentralized, 262
environmental, 274, 276–278 ( see also  
Environmental governance)
global, 60, 63–64, 67, 69, 108–109, 
257, 271, 274, 277, 279–280, 283, 
284–286
global experimentalist, 111
health, 283, 285
network, 271, 276
patterns, 274
plurality (of modes), 30, 86, 89, 91, 
106
political, 89, 90
privatization (of), 7, 15, 60, 90–91, 
216, 249
security, 283
technical, 6, 14
Government(s), 1, 6, 23, 27, 28, 31–32, 
37, 39, 40, 42, 46, 61, 65, 66, 70, 72, 
111, 113, 116, 128–129, 133, 134, 
138, 169, 172, 175, 179, 186, 205, 
217, 233–235, 238, 242–245, 253, 
261–263, 269, 276, 280, 287
Governmentality, 40
Graduated response, 77, 94
Group of Seven (G-7), 280
Guidelines, 107
History, 12, 22, 27, 34, 37, 39, 43, 45, 
46, 47, 99, 113, 132, 137, 188, 219, 
221, 273
Home Depot, 185–186
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Index  309
Human rights, 1, 6, 7, 16, 26–29, 35,  
39, 44, 47, 93, 117, 146, 169, 171, 
173, 175–181, 201, 218, 234, 235, 
238, 259. See also  Freedom of 
expression
privacy, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 17, 18, 
40, 71, 72, 73, 90, 91, 94, 96, 123, 
125, 130–131, 137, 138, 146, 158–
159, 169–170, 172, 176, 178–179, 
223, 227, 239, 241, 242, 259
user/population control, 176, 179,  
242
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure 
(HTTPS), 5
Ideas, 10, 36, 40, 73, 96, 111, 123, 133, 
219, 222, 244, 253, 254, 273, 277, 
280, 283
Identity, 3, 4, 13, 33, 39, 37, 125, 256, 
261, 264
Imaginary, 170, 254–256, 260, 262, 
264–265
Improvisation, 279, 287
Inclusion, 47, 105–106, 152, 220, 
258–260
Indigenous research methods, 286
Industry, 1, 7, 8, 11, 13, 15, 25, 124, 
133, 134, 138, 171, 213, 234–236, 
240, 242, 249, 262, 286
industry-sponsored research, 241
Inequality, 97, 177
Information
environment, 239, 242
processing, 42–45
schools (iSchools), 233, 248
security, 231–250
security research, 232, 236, 237, 240, 
242, 244, 247–248
studies, 117, 233
systems, 95, 132, 231, 233, 236
Information and communication tech -
nologies (ICTs), 17, 23, 76, 87, 93, 
95, 180, 231Infrastructure, 4, 7, 8–10, 14–15, 21, 23, 
25, 42, 66, 74, 85, 92, 96–100, 105, 
108, 118, 125, 126–127, 128, 130, 
132–33, 170, 179, 180, 185, 188, 
201, 217–18, 221, 235, 258, 278, 285
digital, 96, 134, 139, 258
Innovation, 7, 16, 18, 32, 44, 64, 87, 96, 
137–138, 145, 217–219, 233, 278
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 5
Integrated services digital network 
(ISDN), 59
Intellectual property rights (IPR), 3, 7, 
14, 24, 70, 90, 96, 238
copyright, 24, 62, 70, 71, 94, 125, 237
trademark, 14, 62–64, 70, 71
Interests, 10, 96, 106, 113–115, 127, 
153, 170, 181, 189, 219, 234, 247, 
258, 259, 262
Intergovernmental organizations, 61, 
67, 114, 259, 261, 274, 283–284
Intermediaries (information), 1, 3, 5, 7, 
13, 15–16, 33, 65, 69, 70, 72, 86, 90, 
94, 96, 125
liability, 14, 42–43, 70, 130, 137, 138
International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC), 196
Business Action in Support of the 
Information Society (BASIS), 196
Internationalized domain names 
(IDNs), 201
International organizations, 6, 8, 14, 71, 
256, 271, 274, 283. See also  Intergov -
ernmental organizations
International relations, 8, 24, 25, 59, 60, 
62, 63, 71, 74, 75, 99, 217
International telecommunications regu -
lations, 6
International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), 6, 108, 114, 201, 274, 284
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
(IANA), 5–6, 63–64, 73, 189, 207
IANA transition, 73, 189, 203, 207
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025310 Index
Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers (ICANN), 
5–7, 10–11, 13, 14, 33–34, 38, 
41, 62, 63–69, 73, 76, 93, 108, 
113–114, 116, 119, 146, 180, 189, 
197, 201, 216, 220, 223, 260–263, 
280, 284
Government Advisory Committee 
(GAC), 65
Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group 
(MAG), 116, 197, 201
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
5, 7, 11, 14, 59, 60, 114, 189, 220, 
223, 279, 284
Internet exchange points, 86, 90
Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 12, 
68–69, 116, 146, 185–186, 188–189, 
191–194, 196–201, 203, 205, 207–
208, 256, 260–264, 274, 280, 284
transcripts, 189, 191, 192–194, 197–
208, 274, 280, 284
Internet of things (IoT), 8, 9, 11, 17, 31, 
126, 130, 138, 145–147, 161, 192, 
194–195, 198–199, 201–202
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, 7
Internet service providers (ISPs), 15, 70, 
73, 92
Interviews, 12, 16, 170–176, 178, 197, 
279, 284, 287
face-to-face, 172, 174, 278
note-taking, 173
open-ended questions, 111, 174,  
255
recording, 173
remote, 172, 174
subjects, 22, 33, 41, 46, 48, 90, 172, 
174, 233, 238, 242, 249, 254
IPv4, 203, 217
IPv6, 203, 206, 228
Kaspersky, 157
Kaye, David, 35, 180
Kill-switch, 37, 94Knowledge, 12, 22, 32, 74, 88, 114, 118, 
125, 138, 170, 174, 232, 249, 254, 
270, 272–283, 285
belief change, 219, 282
creation, 190, 262, 274–275, 278–279
dissemination, 222, 249, 275, 278, 
280, 288
production (of), 32, 88, 125, 283
stickiness, 272–273
transfer episodes, 28, 138, 274, 276, 
278–280, 283, 285
Law, 2, 6–12, 14–16, 21–25, 28, 29, 30, 
34–38, 40–42, 44, 46, 60–63, 66, 71, 
73–75, 88–89, 98, 99, 105–108,  
111–112, 117, 124, 129, 131, 146, 
150, 152, 175, 177, 179, 181, 198, 
200, 205, 237–239, 241–243,  
247–248, 257–258, 271. See also  
 Fragmentation: legal
international, 8, 22, 24–25, 35, 37, 40, 
44, 73, 88, 108, 175, 177, 271
interoperability, 5, 95, 118, 130–131, 
133
national (sovereignty), 6, 17, 62, 64, 
108, 118, 130, 137
norms (legal), 8, 14, 25, 64, 66, 72–73, 
88–89, 91–93, 105–107, 112–113, 
126, 169–170, 259–260, 263, 
272–273
rule of, 14, 22, 25, 36, 38, 42, 111–112
soft, 61, 117, 177, 181
theory, 105, 107
Leadership, 37, 67, 222, 272, 274–275, 
277, 282
Learning, 11, 18, 25, 107, 191, 196, 221, 
259, 269–286
governance, 18, 25, 270, 271–272, 
275–279, 279, 281, 284
interorganizational, 270, 274–275, 
281, 284–285
machine, 11, 126, 191, 196, 221, 301
organizational, 270, 272, 275–277, 284
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Index  311
policy ( see Policy: learning)
relational, 277
types, 270, 272, 275, 277–278, 
281–282
Legitimacy, 7, 16, 64, 73, 105–106,  
111–114, 116–117, 255, 257,  
258–259, 260, 264, 282
Literature review, 33, 256
Longitudinal dimension/analysis, 132, 
138, 194, 221, 270, 278–279, 284, 
287
Mailing list (analysis), 11, 16, 128, 214, 
219–224
Manning, Chelsea (formerly Bradley), 46
Market, 6, 9, 14, 41, 64, 70, 89, 98–99, 
110, 125, 149, 161, 163, 170, 180, 
202, 215–217, 236
dynamics, 215
free, 180
Materiality, 95–97, 216–218
Meaning, 4, 42, 66, 170, 177, 188–189, 
197, 214, 218–219, 233, 254–256, 
263–265, 271
meaning-making, 42, 170, 214,  
218–219, 255, 264
Mediation, 9, 12, 86, 90, 113
mediated environments, 87, 239
Mesh theory, 110
Metadata, 127–128, 131, 133–137, 220
Metagovernance, 13, 21, 23, 26, 30–32, 
35–36, 49
Mixed methods, 16, 214, 284
Morris worm, 236, 243
Multidisciplinary, 117–118
Multistakeholder, 4, 7, 8, 10–11, 15, 
17–18, 61–62, 67–69, 73, 89, 91–92, 
94, 112–118, 128, 139, 178, 181, 
186, 197–198, 200–201, 218, 253–
265, 270–271, 273–274, 275–277, 
279–280, 286
substantive and performative multi -
stakeholder governance, 69Narrative, 17, 27, 169, 175–180, 
218–219, 223, 253–257, 259–260, 
263–265
National Centers of Academic Excel -
lence in Cyber Defense, 244
Nation-state. See State
developed, 277
developing, 198–200, 277
Natural language processing (NLP), 126, 
190
Negotiation, 38, 90, 93–94, 98, 106, 
114, 213, 220, 259, 263
Netherlands, 279, 281
NETmundial, 116, 118, 196, 253
Netsweeper, 239
Network(ing), 2–3, 6, 12–14, 17, 
18, 22, 24–25, 27–33, 35, 37, 38–39, 
41, 43, 45–47, 59, 64, 67–68, 70–71, 
73, 86, 88–90, 92, 94–95, 97–98, 
111, 113–114, 123–124, 126, 128, 
131, 133, 136, 145, 150–151, 171, 
178, 189, 200, 202, 205, 213,  
216–218, 221–222, 236, 238, 241, 
243, 248, 270–271, 273–276,  
278–284, 287
context, 25, 29, 279, 281–282,  
284
decentralization, 7, 41, 61, 133, 135, 
262
effectiveness, 281–282
interorganizational, 270, 274–275, 
281, 284
neutrality, 3, 27, 131, 198, 200–203, 
208, 217
social network analysis (SNA), 12, 25, 
123, 213, 221, 273, 276, 284, 287
structure, 281
Nigeria, 283
Nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs), 68, 115, 127, 129, 160, 189, 
235, 242, 283, 287
Norms, 8, 14, 25, 64, 66, 72–73, 88–89, 
91–93, 105–107, 112–113, 126, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025312 Index
Norms (cont.)
 169–170, 259–260, 263, 272–273, 
259, 273, 287. See also  Law: legal 
norms
framework, 25, 64, 106–107, 113
sources, 89
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 22
Obama, Barack (US President), 186, 188, 
207, 235
agreement with China on computer 
espionage, 235 ( see also  China)
Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), 9, 186
Ordering, 3, 4, 12, 85, 88–90, 95,  
218–219, 224, 256, 264
private, 12, 88–89
processes, 4, 88, 218, 256
social, 218–219, 224, 256
Organization for Economic Coopera -
tion and Development (OECD), 32, 
109, 274
Outcomes, 24, 94, 123, 149–150, 152, 
221, 224, 234, 253, 257, 259, 261, 
263, 264, 270, 281–284, 288
Participatory action research, 285
Partnerships, 129, 133, 253, 257, 260, 274
Performativity, 87, 224, 254
Phishing, 74, 150–151, 154–156, 
162–163
Platforms, 5, 10–11, 14–15, 42, 65, 73, 
117, 123–125, 127–129, 132, 138, 
169–170, 179, 180, 189, 202, 220, 
273, 287
Pluralism (theoretical), 23, 28, 110–111
Policy, 1–6, 8, 13–15, 17, 21–29, 31–35, 
38, 43–48, 59, 60, 63–65, 67–68, 
70–71, 73–76, 85, 90–91, 94, 108, 
110, 112, 116–118, 123, 128–129, 
131, 133, 138, 146, 150, 152, 
162–163, 171–172, 174–175, 177, 179–181, 189, 196, 198, 200, 207, 
213, 218–219, 222, 224, 231, 235, 
247–249, 254–264, 269–271, 273–285
bottom-up, 61, 133, 257, 263, 265, 280
change, 15, 26, 91, 118, 123, 146, 198, 
219, 275, 277, 281–283
communities, 4, 8, 16, 18, 34, 110, 
112, 130, 133, 135, 138, 221–222, 
232, 242, 256, 258, 278
cross-border, 6, 39, 59, 73, 118, 217, 
253, 256, 285
development, 24, 38, 110, 163, 174, 
263, 282
entrepreneurs, 274
evidence-based, 124, 126–127,  
129–130, 138, 224, 278
experiments, 64, 277, 281, 284
learning, 270–271, 273–285
making, 3, 6, 8, 13–15, 21, 31–35, 46, 
48, 85, 112, 123, 133, 138, 175, 213, 
219, 255–260, 262, 271, 276, 278, 
280–281
network, 22, 38, 47, 189
public, 1, 4, 5, 14, 60, 64, 94, 163, 
172, 175, 177, 198, 200, 231, 235, 
263, 269–270, 279
spaces (domains), 8, 31–32, 65, 67, 76, 
171, 231, 256, 269–270, 273–274, 
277–280, 285
transfer, 274–275, 278–279
Political science, 12–13, 15, 40, 60, 
71–72, 74–75, 88, 99, 109, 217, 275, 
279
Political structures, 255
Power, 2, 4, 6–7, 16–18, 22, 31, 39, 69, 
88, 96–97, 100, 109, 111, 118, 25, 
130, 180–181, 207, 214, 217–221, 
236–237, 242, 255, 258, 260, 265, 
271, 279, 281, 283, 286–288, 280, 
281, 283, 287
algorithmic, 90, 248
balance of, 93
computational, 187, 190, 208
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Index  313
corporate, 115
law, 152, 161, 164
nuclear, 235
political, 9, 27, 92, 108–109, 139, 234, 
258
state, 9, 69, 108, 242
technology, 177–179, 213
Practices, 8, 13, 30–31, 33, 36, 39, 40, 
47, 59, 69, 85, 88–91, 95–96, 131, 
138, 163, 169–170, 174–175, 177–
181, 214, 220, 223, 233, 236, 238, 
241–243, 254, 260, 274
situated, 87, 91
Privacy, 91, 94, 96, 123, 125, 127–
128, 130–131, 137–138, 146, 148, 
158–159, 169–170, 172–173, 175, 
178–179, 259, 181, 223, 237–239, 
241–242, 259. See also  Human rights
and surveillance, 73
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 159
Private sector, 2–4, 6, 11, 13, 15–17, 
25, 33, 40, 67, 92, 113, 116, 126, 
128, 196, 198–200, 233–235, 239–
242, 248, 253, 257–259, 270–271, 
274–276, 280–281, 287. See also  
Corporations
Provalis ProSuite, 193
Public administration, 269, 274–276, 
279, 281, 287
Q methodology, 276
Qualitative methods, 127, 170–171, 
188–189, 213, 219, 221–222, 233, 
281, 284–285
Quantitative methods, 15, 127, 146, 
188–189, 221, 222, 233, 256, 
284–285
R, 193
R Packages, 193
RStudio, 193
R tm, 193
Rvest, 193Ranking Digital Rights (initiative), 43
Rationality, 111
Regime, 23–26, 64, 66, 73, 105,  
109–111, 114, 145–146, 231, 235, 
238, 243, 257
CERT regime, 243
complex, 8, 72, 217
regime theory, 8, 23–25, 66, 72
Regulation, 6, 8, 14, 27–29, 38, 68–69, 
73, 88–89, 91, 93, 95–98, 105, 
108–111, 113, 117, 125, 131, 139, 
169, 176–177, 179–180, 217, 257, 
259–265, 285
hybrid, 110
instruments, 108
polycentric, 110
self-regulation, 67
Representation, 4, 114, 255, 257–258, 
262
Request for Comments (RFC), 222
Resilience, 26, 107, 203, 287–288
Risks, 235, 283
San Bernardino, California (terrorist 
attack), 9
Science and technology studies (STS), 2, 
8, 12, 14, 62–63, 85, 169–170, 215, 
274, 283, 285
agency, 14, 21, 24, 85–86, 89, 92, 
95–96, 170, 255
boundary object, 87
dispositif, 87
Science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM), 233
Secrecy, 11, 16, 91, 242–244, 246, 248
Security, 1, 2–4, 8–11, 17–18, 35, 37–39, 
63, 69–74, 86, 90, 96, 125, 130, 138, 
146–147, 149–150, 153, 155–157, 
161, 163, 169, 203–204, 216,  
231–249, 278, 283
Sense-making, 42, 173, 175, 264
Silk Road, 41
Silos, 22, 28, 232, 247
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025314 Index
Simulations, 147, 161, 284, 286
Snowden, Edward, 1, 72–73, 186, 
245–246
Social media, 1, 4–5, 15, 41–42, 65, 70, 
73, 123, 125, 128–129, 134–135, 
138, 179, 187, 189, 198, 200, 220, 
237, 240, 241, 274, 287
Social relations, 30, 87, 110, 219
Social science(s), 35, 61, 74, 86,  
106–107, 118, 221, 224, 232–233, 
247–248, 256
social scientists, 35, 86, 188, 213,  
233
Social structure(s), 32, 110, 234
Sociological functionalism, 106
Socio-technical, 14, 21, 42, 86–87, 91, 
95–99, 124, 129, 218
Software, 5, 12, 24, 29, 60, 70–71,  
95, 99, 131, 135, 157, 188–189,  
193–194, 202, 214, 216
Sovereign(ty), 6, 17, 62, 64, 69, 74,  
108–109, 118, 130, 137
Spam, 74, 125, 223
Stakeholder, 30, 35, 59, 63, 67, 93, 108, 
112–118, 124, 129–130, 132, 137, 
163, 196, 205, 208, 214, 218–222, 
224, 257, 259–264, 276, 279, 286.  
See also  Multistakeholder
Standardization, 66, 105, 134, 214–221
standard-setting bodies, 59, 73, 213
Standards, 3, 5, 7, 10–11, 13, 59, 66, 
90–91, 94, 105, 112, 114–115, 117, 
125–126, 133–135, 177–179, 181, 
186, 213–214, 216, 218, 220, 245, 
261–264, 279
State, 3–4, 6, 9, 14, 17, 22–23, 31–33, 
35–39, 41–42, 61, 65, 69, 71–75, 93, 
99, 108, 138–139, 177–178, 180, 
189, 239, 241–242, 244–246, 249, 
257–258, 270, 280, 283–284
changing, 31, 39
modern, 36
nature (of), 36networked, 31
power, 1, 72, 108, 242
Statistics, 12, 15, 128, 153–154, 158, 
161–162, 185, 190, 194, 221–222
Storytelling, 45–46, 175–176, 254–257
Stuxnet, 9, 185–186
Surveillance, 1, 3, 7, 39, 71–73, 86, 90, 
93, 131, 138, 178, 186, 233, 238–239, 
241–242
and privacy, 11, 71, 73, 91, 123
spyware, 74, 238
Survey(s), 148–149, 152, 259, 276, 279, 
284, 286
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
26, 203, 208, 253
Symantec, 153, 157–158
Tallinn Manual, 22, 38
Target (hack), 185–186
Technical sector, 1, 5–6, 8, 12, 63, 96, 
116, 173, 178, 180, 198, 215, 233, 
239, 241, 261, 270, 279, 281, 287
Technology, 11–12, 14, 16, 32, 38, 40, 
46–47, 62–63, 66, 68, 75, 85–86, 89, 
91–92, 99, 131–132, 138–139, 146, 
161, 169–170, 175, 177–179, 181, 
203, 215–216, 233, 239, 249, 271
algorithms, 3–4, 10–11, 14, 16, 21, 24, 
35, 42–46, 90, 155, 216, 237–238, 248
architecture, 3, 4, 6–7, 12, 14–16, 18, 
37, 46–47, 68, 124, 134–135, 137, 
139, 213, 221, 257
critical Internet resources, 2–3, 64, 
86, 90
failure, 97, 236
infrastructure ( see Infrastructure)
proxy (of power), 1, 4, 9–10
proxy (server), 134, 137
type, 271–272
Text mining, 16, 188–208
bag of words, 190
CRISP-DM (Cross-Industry Standard 
Process for Data Mining), 192, 193
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025Index  315
deductive processes (confirmatory), 
190
dictionary (lexicon, categorization 
model), 189, 190, 194, 195
document term matrix (DTM), 194
hierarchical cluster analysis, 194–195, 
202
inductive processes (exploratory), 
189–192, 194, 201
natural language processing (NLP), 
90, 126
statistical text mining, 190
TF*IDF (term frequency by inverse 
document frequency), 194, 197
topic modeling, 194, 201, 203, 207
Think tanks, 273, 288
Threat, 71, 154, 157, 176, 179, 234–236, 
239, 249
private sector-caused, 236, 241, 248
state-caused, 177, 241–243, 246,  
248
vectors, 148
TJX/TJMaxx (hack), 185–186
Transparency, 16, 43, 90, 109, 114,  
116–117, 129–131, 137, 163, 175, 
178, 242–243, 249, 258, 260,  
262–263, 281
Trust, 9, 41, 89, 92–93, 98–118, 123–25, 
129–131, 136–137, 139, 172–173, 
243, 272–274, 277, 281
Twitter, 4, 65, 70, 187
application programming interface 
(API), 134, 136, 187
as data, 187–188
Typology, 1, 7–8, 21, 23, 29, 32–33, 35, 
39–41, 43–46, 48, 89, 92–93, 99, 114, 
116, 136, 153, 239, 246, 248, 270,  
282
Uncertainty, 100, 130, 138, 279, 285
United Kingdom, 126, 133, 247
UK Government Communications 
Headquarters (GCHQ), 246United Nations, 16, 26, 35, 61, 67, 74, 
179, 181, 188, 191, 207, 253, 258, 
261, 263, 274, 284
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development), 274
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Communication Orga -
nization), 201, 274, 284
UN Global Compact, 114
UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights, 177–178
UNICTTF (Information and Commu -
nication Technologies Task Force), 
93
UN Internet Governance Forum ( see 
Internet Governance Forum)
UN Sustainable Development 
Goals ( see Sustainable Development 
Goals)
Working Group on Internet 
 Governance (WGIG), 65–67, 93, 113, 
126
World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS), 65, 67–68, 113, 185, 
191, 208, 258, 260–261, 274
United States
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 59, 269 ( see also  
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network)
Department of Commerce (DOC), 6, 
10, 76, 261–262, 270, 280
Department of Defense (DOD), 59, 
216, 269
Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), 244, 246–247
Department of Justice (DOJ), 235, 
246
Department of State, 270
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
245–246
Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC), 28, 38
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025316 Index
United States (cont.)
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 186, 188–189, 
192, 194, 195, 201, 203, 203–207
National Science Foundation (NSF), 
60, 241
National Security Agency (NSA), 72, 
244–247
Office of the President (White House), 
30, 207, 235
Supreme Court, 43, 46
US Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 
(CFAA), 237–238, 248
US Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(DMCA), 237–238
Value(s), 9–11, 18, 28, 46, 87, 90, 92, 96, 
107, 111–112, 114, 139, 169–170, 
175, 214, 219–220, 232
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 5
WHOIS, 6, 215–216
WikiLeaks, 46, 238, 245
World Commission on Dams, 256
World Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT), 6, 108
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 5, 
114, 133, 136
Zero-day exploits, 9
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/book-pdf/2440819/book_9780262360869.pdf by guest on 05 March 2025