January 27, 2025 114 CommentsA Tumultuous W eek for Federal
Cybersecurity Efforts
Image: Shutterstock. Greg Meland.
  3/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 1/12President T rump  last week issued a ﬂurry of executive orders that upended a number of
government initiatives focused on improving the nation’ s cybersecurity posture. The president
ﬁred all advisors from the Department of Homeland Security’ s Cyber Safety Review Board, called
for the creation of a strategic cryptocurrency reserve, and voided a Biden administration action
that sought to reduce the risks that artiﬁcial intelligence poses to consumers, workers and national
security .
On his ﬁrst full day back in the White House, Trump dismissed all 15 advisory committee
members of the Cyber Safety Review Board  (CSRB), a nonpartisan government entity
established in February 2022 with a mandate to investigate the causes of major cybersecurity
events. The CSRB has so far produced three detailed reports, including an analysis of the
Log4Shell vulnerability  crisis, attacks from the cybercrime group LAPSUS$ , and the 2023
Microsoft Exchange Online breach .
The CSRB was in the midst of an inquiry into cyber intrusions uncovered recently across a broad
spectrum of U.S. telecommunications providers at the hands of Chinese state-sponsored hackers.
One of the CSRB’ s most recognizable names is Chris Krebs (no relation), the former director of
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency  (CISA). Krebs was ﬁred by President
Trump in November 2020 for declaring the presidential contest was the most secure in American
history , and for refuting Trump’ s false claims of election fraud.
South Dakota Governor Kristi Noem , conﬁrmed by the U.S. Senate last week as the new director
of the DHS, criticized CISA  at her conﬁrmation hearing, TheRecord  reports .
Noem told lawmakers CISA  needs to be “much more ef fective, smaller , more nimble, to really
fulﬁll their mission,” which she said should be focused on hardening federal IT  systems and
hunting for digital intruders. Noem said the agency’ s work on ﬁghting misinformation shows it has
“gotten far of f mission” and involved “using their resources in ways that was never intended.”
“The misinformation and disinformation that they have stuck their toe into and meddled with,
should be refocused back onto what their job is,” she said.
Moses Frost , a cybersecurity instructor with the SANS Institute, compared the sacking of the
CSRB members to ﬁring all of the experts at the National T ransportation Safety Board  (NTSB)
while they’re in the middle of an investigation into a string of airline disasters.
“I don’t recall seeing an ‘NTSB Board’  being ﬁred during the middle of a plane crash
investigation,” Frost said in a recent SANS newsletter . “I can say that the attackers in the phone
companies will not stop because the review board has gone away . We do need to ﬁgure out how
these attacks occurred, and CISA  did appear to be doing some good for the vast majority of the
federal systems.”
Speaking of transportation, The Record  notes that Transportation Security Administration chief
David Pekoske  was ﬁred  despite overseeing critical cybersecurity improvements across pipeline,
rail and aviation sectors. Pekoske was appointed by Trump in 2017 and had his 5-year tenure
renewed in 2022 by former President Joe Biden.3/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 2/12AI & CR YPTOCURRENCY
Shortly after being sworn in for a second time, Trump voided a Biden executive order that focused
on supporting research and development in artiﬁcial intelligence. The previous administration’ s
order on AI was crafted with an eye toward managing the safety and security risks introduced by
the technology . But a statement  released by the White House said Biden’ s approach to AI had
hindered development, and that the United States would support AI systems that are “free from
ideological bias or engineered social agendas,” to maintain leadership.
The Trump administration issued its own executive order on AI, which calls for an “AI Action Plan”
to be led by the assistant to the president for science and technology , the White House “AI &
crypto czar ,” and the national security advisor . It also directs the White House to revise and
reissue policies to federal agencies on the government’ s acquisition and governance of AI “to
ensure that harmful barriers to America’ s AI leadership are eliminated.”
Trump’ s AI & crypto czar is David Sacks , an entrepreneur and Silicon V alley venture capitalist
who argues that the Biden administration’ s approach to AI and cryptocurrency has driven
innovation overseas. Sacks recently asserted that non-fungible cryptocurrency tokens and
memecoins are neither securities nor commodities, but rather should be treated as “collectibles”
like baseball cards and stamps.
There is already a legal deﬁnition of collectibles under the U.S. tax code that applies to things like
art or antiques, which can be subject to high capital gains taxes. But Joe Hall , a capital markets
attorney and partner at Davis Polk, told Fortune  there are  no market regulations that apply to
collectibles under U.S. securities law . Hall said Sacks’  comments “suggest a viewpoint that it
would not be appropriate to regulate these things the way we regulate securities.”
The new administration’ s position makes sense considering that the Trump family is deeply and
personally invested in a number of recent memecoin ventures that have attracted billions from
investors. President Trump and First Lady Melania Trump each launched their own vanity
memecoins this month, dubbed $TRUMP  and $MELANIA .
The W all Street Journal  reported Thursday  the market capitalization of $TRUMP  stood at about
$7 billion, down from a peak of near $15 billion, while $MELANIA  is hovering somewhere in the
$460 million mark. Just two months before the 2024 election, Trump’ s three sons debuted a
cryptocurrency token called World Liberty Financial .
Despite maintaining a considerable personal stake in how cryptocurrency is regulated, Trump
issued an executive order on January 23  calling for a working group to be chaired by Sacks that
would develop “a federal regulatory framework governing digital assets, including stablecoins,”
and evaluate the creation of a “strategic national digital assets stockpile.”
Translation: Using taxpayer dollars to prop up the speculative, volatile, and highly risky
cryptocurrency industry , which has been marked by endless scams, rug-pulls, 8-ﬁgure cyber
heists, rampant fraud, and unrestrained innovations in money laundering.3/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 3/12WEAPONIZA TION & DISINFORMA TION
Prior to the election, President Trump frequently vowed to use a second term to exact retribution
against his perceived enemies. Part of that promise materialized in an executive order Trump
issued last week titled “ Ending the W eaponization of the Federal Government ,” which decried “an
unprecedented, third-world weaponization of prosecutorial power to upend the democratic
process,” in the prosecution of more than 1,500 people who invaded the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6,
2021.
On Jan. 21, Trump commuted the sentences  of several leaders of the Proud Boys and Oath
Keepers who were convicted of seditious conspiracy . He also issued “a full, complete and
unconditional pardon to all other individuals convicted of of fenses related to events that occurred
at or near the United States Capitol on January 6, 2021,” which include those who assaulted law
enforcement ofﬁcers.
The New York Times reports  “the language of the document suggests — but does not explicitly
state — that the Trump administration review will examine the actions of local district attorneys or
state ofﬁcials, such as the district attorneys in Manhattan or Fulton County , Ga., or the New York
attorney general, all of whom ﬁled cases against President Trump.”
Another Trump order called “ Restoring Freedom of Speech and Ending Federal Censorship ”
asserts:
“Over the last 4 years, the previous administration trampled free speech rights by censoring
Americans’  speech on online platforms, often by exerting substantial coercive pressure on third
parties, such as social media companies, to moderate, deplatform, or otherwise suppress speech
that the Federal Government did not approve,” the Trump administration alleged. “Under the guise
of combatting ‘misinformation,’  ‘disinformation,’  and ‘malinformation,’  the Federal Government
infringed on the constitutionally protected speech rights of American citizens across the United
States in a manner that advanced the Government’ s preferred narrative about signiﬁcant matters
of public debate.”
Both of these executive orders have potential implications  for security , privacy and civil liberties
activists who have sought to track conspiracy theories and raise awareness about disinformation
efforts on social media coming from U.S. adversaries.
In the wake of the 2020 election, Republicans created the House Judiciary Committee’ s Select
Subcommittee on the W eaponization of the Federal Government . Led by GOP  Rep. Jim
Jordan  of Ohio, the committee’ s stated purpose was to investigate alleged collusion between the
Biden administration and tech companies to unconstitutionally shut down political speech.
The GOP  committee focused much of its ire at members of the short-lived Disinformation
Governance Board , an advisory board to DHS created in 2022 (the “combating misinformation,
disinformation, and malinformation” quote from Trump’ s executive order is a reference to the
board’ s stated mission). Conservative groups seized on social media posts made by the director3/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 4/12of the board, who resigned  after facing death threats. The board was dissolved by DHS soon
after.
In his ﬁrst administration, President Trump created a special prosecutor to probe the origins of the
FBI’s investigation into possible collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian operatives
seeking to inﬂuence the 2016 election. Part of that inquiry examined evidence gathered by some
of the world’ s most renowned cybersecurity experts who identiﬁed frequent and unexplained
communications  between an email server used by the Trump Organization  and  Alfa Bank , one
of Russia’ s largest ﬁnancial institutions.
Trump’ s Special Prosecutor John Durham  later subpoenaed and/or deposed dozens of security
experts who’d collected, viewed or merely commented on the data. Similar harassment and
deposition demands would come from lawyers for Alfa Bank. Durham ultimately indicted Michael
Sussman , the former federal cybercrime prosecutor who reported the oddity to the FBI. Sussman
was acquitted in May 2022. Last week, Trump appointed Durham to lead the U.S. attorney’ s ofﬁce
in Brooklyn, NY .
Quinta Jurecic  at Lawfare  notes  that while the executive actions are ominous, they are also
vague, and could conceivably generate either a campaign of retaliation, or nothing at all.
“The two orders establish that there will be investigations but leave open the questions of what
kind of investigations, what will be investigated, how long this will take, and what the
consequences might be,” Jurecic wrote. “It is difﬁcult to draw ﬁrm conclusions as to what to
expect. Whether this ambiguity is intentional or the result of sloppiness or disagreement within
Trump’ s team, it has at least one immediate advantage as far as the president is concerned:
generating fear among the broad universe of potential subjects of those investigations.”
On Friday , Trump moved to ﬁre at least 17 inspectors general , the government watchdogs who
conduct audits and investigations of executive branch actions, and who often uncover instances
of government waste, fraud and abuse. Lawfare’ s Jack Goldsmith  argues that the removals are
probably legal even though Trump deﬁed a 2022 law that required congressional notice of the
terminations, which Trump did not give.
“Trump probably acted lawfully , I think, because the notice requirement is probably
unconstitutional,” Goldsmith wrote. “The real bite in the 2022 law , however , comes in the
limitations it places on Trump’ s power  to replace  the terminated IGs—limitations that I believe are
constitutional. This aspect of the law will make it hard, but not impossible, for Trump to put
loyalists atop the dozens of vacant IG ofﬁces around the executive branch. The ultimate fate of IG
independence during Trump 2.0, however , depends less on legal protections than on whether
Congress, which traditionally protects IGs, stands up for them now . Don’t hold your breath.”
Among the many Biden administration executive orders revoked by President Trump last week
was an action from December 2021 establishing the United States Council on T ransnational
Organized Crime , which is charged with advising the White House on a range of criminal
activities, including drug and weapons trafﬁcking, migrant smuggling, human trafﬁcking,3/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 5/12A LITTLE SUNSHINE THE COMING STORM
ALFA BANK DAVID SACKS HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE'S SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE
WEAPONIZATION OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT JACK GOLDSMITH JOE HALL JOHN DURHAM
LAWFARE MELANIA TRUMP MICHAEL SUSSMAN PRESIDENT TRUMP QUINTA JURECIC REP. JIM
JORDAN UNITED STATES COUNCIL ON TRANSNATIONAL ORGANIZED CRIME WORLD LIBERTY
FINANCIALcybercrime, intellectual property theft, money laundering, wildlife and timber trafﬁcking, illegal
ﬁshing, and illegal mining.
So far , the White House doesn’t appear to have revoked an executive order  that former President
Biden issued less than a week before President Trump took ofﬁce. On Jan. 16, 2025, Biden
released a directive that focused on improving the security of federal agencies and contractors,
and giving the government more power to sanction the hackers who target critical infrastructure.
This entry was posted on Monday 27th of January 2025 09:50 PM
114 thoughts on “ A Tumultuous W eek for Federal Cybersecurity Ef forts”
Thank you for this excellent recap, Brian. I truly appreciate how you’ve pulled together the facts
and provided links to help us look back over this past week’ s actions.
agree !Donna
January 28, 2025
Lou
-
January 29, 2025
And… he shut all this down, just as he launched his own cryptocurrency , *and* China, suspected
of the telecom hack, and announced their own, better , AI.
Sold to the highest bidder?mark
January 28, 2025
These comments are all over the place. Can someone clarify for me whether this article is left
leaning or right leaning? Pro Trump or anti Trump? Is there malicious intent in the presentation of
the information that I am just not smart enough to see? Thank you in advance.ctar
January 28, 2025
AK
-
January 28, 20253/5/25, 10:28 AM A Tumultuous Week for Federal Cybersecurity Efforts – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/a-tumultuous-week-for-federal-cybersecurity-efforts/ 6/12