The Dangerous Policy of Weakening Security to Facilitate Surve illance 
Jon M. Peha 
Carnegie Mellon University 
peha@cmu.edu 
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/bio.html  
 
Overview 
The American people have an acute and growing need f or better cybersecurity protection from 
numerous threats ranging from identity theft to indust rial espionage.   The American people also need 
government law enforcement and intelligence agencies that can conduct effective surveillance against 
individuals who are involved with crimes or terrorism.  Most of the time, these two needs are entirely 
compatible, but there are occasionally issues on whi ch a balance must be struck.  If the balance is 
wrong, a well-intentioned government agency can severe ly undermine security rather than strengthen 
it, and endanger the very American citizens that the agency hopes to protect.    Based on recent press 
reports regarding the alleged activities of the Nationa l Security Agency (NSA), it is time for a 
reevaluation of this balance. 
 
Individual computer users, large corporations, and govern ment agencies all depend on the security 
features built into information technology products and services that they buy on the open market.  If 
the security features of these widely available prod ucts and services are weak, everyone is in greater 
danger.  There have recently been allegations that U.S . government agencies have engaged in a number 
activities deliberately intended to weaken this wide ly available technology.  Weakening commercial 
products and services does have the benefit that it b ecomes easier for U.S. intelligence agencies to 
conduct surveillance on targets who use the weakene d technology, and if it is occurring, this is probabl y 
the motivation.  However, this strategy also inevitab ly makes it easier for criminals, terrorists, and 
foreign powers to infiltrate these systems for their ow n purposes.  Moreover, everyone who uses this 
technology is vulnerable, and not just the handful w ho may be surveillance targets for U.S. intelligence  
agencies.  No government agency should act to reduce the security of a product or service sold on the 
open market without first conducting a careful risk as sessment. 1  If the recent allegations in the press 
are correct, and no such risk assessment occurred, the W hite House should make sure that a thorough 
review is conducted now, and that policies are chang ed as needed based on this assessment.   
 
The next section briefly describes some of the governm ent policies and technical strategies that 
might have the undesired effect of reducing security.   The following section discusses why the effect of  
these practices may be opposite what their proponents  probably intend.    
 
  
                                                           
1 Note that the issues raised in this paper are not necessarily applicable to targeted  surveillance, such as when a 
law enforcement agency compromises the security of the specific computer system owned by the principal  target 
of a criminal investigation.  This paper is intende d to address weakened security in products and serv ices sold on 
the open market. How Government Might Weaken Security 
Government can greatly affect the security of commerci al products, either positively or negatively.  This 
section gives examples of both the technical approac hes and policy strategies that might be employed. 
 
An obvious avenue is to convince the designer of a computer or communications system to make 
those systems easier for government agencies to acce ss.  Beginning with the technical perspective, 
there are many ways that a designer can achieve this if he or she is so motivated.  For example, the 
system may be equipped with a “back door,” which is a method of accessing a system that bypasses the 
usual security protection.  This back door would be k nown to the company that created it, and 
presumably to a government agency that requested it, but not to the purchaser of the product or 
service.  The hope is that the government agency will  use this feature when it is given authority to do so , 
but no one else will.  However, creating a back door introduces the risk that other parties will find the 
vulnerability.  This strategy is similar to leaving a  large window in your home open for your own use, and 
simply hoping the neighborhood burglar doesn’t notic e, except that in this case it is the government and  
not the homeowner that propped this window open.  In  the eyes of security professionals, hope is not a 
“best practice.”  Where there are capable adversaries wh o are actively seeking security vulnerabilities, 
this approach can obviously end badly.  Moreover, the use of back doors is just one way to create 
vulnerability by design.  A designer might instead em bed “spyware” into a system, which is software 
that captures information and makes it available to an outside party, all without the knowledge or 
informed consent of the system’s owner.  Alternatively , rather than storing and transferring data in 
encrypted form, a designer may leave information une ncrypted at limited times, thereby making 
surveillance easy for those who know when and where t o look.  All techniques of this kind become 
dangerous once they are discovered by adversaries. 
 
One example of how attackers can subvert vulnerabiliti es placed into systems for benign reasons 
occurred in the network of the largest commercial cellul ar operator in Greece. 2   Switches deployed in 
the system came equipped with built-in wiretapping features that were intended for authorized law 
enforcement agencies.  Some unknown attacker was abl e to install software that made use of these 
embedded wiretapping features to surreptitiously and i llegally eavesdrop on calls from many cell 
phones, including phones belonging to the Prime Mini ster of Greece, a hundred high-ranking Greek 
dignitaries, and an employee of the U.S. Embassy in Greece, before the security breach was finally 
discovered.  A vulnerability created to fight crime was  used to commit crime. 
 
There are many ways a government can motivate designe rs to adopt technical approaches such as 
these.  Under a few circumstances, agencies can direct ly assert the legal authority to mandate these 
technical design changes.  Less obviously,  as an e normous purchaser, the federal government can 
sometimes demand the inclusion of features of intere st as a procurement requirement, often making 
these features a de facto standard in products sold to  non-government buyers in the process.   
Procurement requirements can be used to strengthen sec urity, perhaps by demanding encryption 
algorithms that are even harder to break than those alrea dy on the market, or to weaken security, 
                                                           
2 V. Prevelakis and D. Spinellis, “The Athens Affair ,” IEEE Spectrum , vol. 44, no. 7, July 2007, pp. 26-33. perhaps by demanding a back door.  Alternatively, the Government could simply pay commercial 
companies to compromise the security of their product s or services using back doors and other 
techniques (as some allege has happened).   
 
A less direct way to undermine the security of produc ts and services is to influence standards 
bodies, since many developers build systems that com ply with the resulting standards even when the 
standards are voluntary.  A government agency can spons or the participation of security experts in 
important standards bodies, and direct these experts t o seek ways to introduce vulnerabilities into 
standards that the government agency knows how to exp loit, instead of directing these experts to make 
the standards as hard as possible for attackers to pe netrate.  The impact of weakening standards may be 
even greater than weakening a specific product or ser vice, because that one standard may be used in so 
many different products and services.  For example, if one can weaken the standard for a general-
purpose encryption algorithm (and it has been alleged that this has already occurred), then it is 
impossible to predict what will become vulnerable.  P erhaps this algorithm will be used to protect stock 
market transactions, or the real-time control of an ele ctric power grid, or the classified designs of a 
military aircraft, which would then become vulnerable.  
 
Weak Security is Dangerous 
Giving law enforcement and intelligence agencies th e ability to conduct electronic surveillance is part o f 
a strategy to limit threats from criminals, foreign powe rs, and terrorists, but so is strengthening the 
cybersecurity used by all Americans. 
 
Weak cybersecurity creates opportunities for sophistic ated criminal organizations.  Well-funded 
criminal organizations will turn to cybsercrime for the same reason they turn to illegal drugs; there is 
money to be made. This imposes costs on the rest of us.  The costs of malicious cyberactivities take 
many forms, including direct financial losses (e.g. fraudulent use of credit cards), theft of intellectua l 
property, theft of sensitive business information, op portunities costs such as the lost productivity when  
a computer system is taken down, and the damage to a company’s reputation when others learn its 
systems have been breached.  One recent study says t hat estimates of these costs range from $24 billion 
to $120 billion per year in the U.S. 3  Weakened security can only increase the high cost o f cybercrime. 
 
Of course, some technically sophisticated organizati ons are challenging the security of American 
computer and communications systems for reasons othe r than mere financial gain.  Finding and 
exploiting security vulnerabilities is part of how int ernational espionage is conducted in the 21 st  century, 
as is clearly demonstrated by recent revelations about the activities of the Chinese government.  In 
addition to economic advantage, foreign governments t hat compromise the security of contractors to 
the U.S. Defense Department may use what they learn t o improve their offensive and defensive military 
capabilities.  Moreover, as we saw from cyberattacks in Estonia and Georgia, cyberattacks on civilian 
systems can be highly disruptive to nations, and pos sibly a force multiplier for military action.  The more  
foreign powers can learn about security vulnerabilities  in critical systems in the U.S., the more 
                                                           
3 Center for Strategic and International Studies, The Economic Impact of CyberCrime and Cyber Espiona ge, July 2013. vulnerable we are.  Worse yet, this is no longer just  the domain of nation states.  Terrorist organizations 
could also launch cyberattacks against critical syste ms.  Perhaps they will time a cyberattack with a 
bombing to maximize the damage and the panic.  Weak ened security can only increase the risk of 
cyberespionage, cyberattack, and cyberterrorism. 
 
If weakened security in commercial products and servi ces is the result of a national policy (as 
opposed to other causes such as human error), and tha t national policy is known or suspected, this does 
additional harm to the nation.  Customers will natura lly prefer products and services from companies 
that they are immune from such a policy.   Thus, suc h a policy in the U.S. could have a significant imp act 
on the competitiveness of all of the U.S. companies  in the information technology sector, which 
combined account for a significant portion of the U.S . economy, and many high-paying jobs. 
 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
There are both supporters and critics of the NSA who h ave presupposed that the NSA’s alleged activities 
have compromised privacy in order to improve security, and then argued about whether the nation wins 
or loses from such a trade.  While the debate over how we should value both privacy and security is 
important, it misses a critical point:  we may have actually compromised both privacy and security in a 
failed attempt to improve security.  It is impossible  to fairly judge whether this is the case from a few 
leaked documents.  A detailed examination is needed .   
 
If examination reveals that government actions have i ndeed weakened the security of widely 
available products and services, and have done more harm than good in the process, then it is not 
enough to simply reverse course on those cases that h ave been uncovered.  We must instead develop a 
more comprehensive approach to assessing risks associa ted with these practices.  It is the NSA’s mission 
to conduct surveillance on individuals that are conn ected to terrorist organizations or foreign powers, 
but it is not typically the NSA’s mission to protec t individual Americans from cyberattacks that lead to 
credit card fraud, to protect companies from cyberattacks  that lead to theft of intellectual property, and 
to protect the competitiveness of U.S. information technology firms in the global marketplace, even 
though surveillance decisions made by the NSA could affect all of these.  A risk assessment that only 
considers issues that fall within the NSA’s normal sc ope would inevitably lead to practices that weaken 
security of commercial products and services even wh en doing so is harmful to American interests.  
Effective assessments must consider all of these. 
 
About the author 
Jon M. Peha is a professor at Carnegie Mellon Universi ty with experience in government, industry, and 
academia.  In government, he has served as Chief Tec hnologist of the Federal Communications 
Commission, Assistant Director of the White House’s Office of Science and Technology Policy, and 
Legislative Fellow in the House Energy and Commerce C ommittee.   In industry, he has been the Chief 
Technical Officer of three high-tech companies.  Curren tly, he is a Carnegie Mellon professor in the Dept. 
of Electrical & Computer Engineering and the Dept. of  Engineering & Public Policy, and former Associate 
Director of the Center for Wireless & Broadband Networks .  He holds a Ph.D. in electrical engineering 
from Stanford.  He is a Fellow of the IEEE, a Fellow of the AAAS, and a member of FCBA and SHPE. 