Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618
Real-time secondary markets for spectrum
Jon M. Peha*,1, Sooksan Panichpapiboon2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Received 1 October 2003; received in revised form 1 May 2004
Abstract
Spectrum licensing enables quality of service guarantees, but often leads to inefﬁcient use of spectrum.
Unlicensed spectrum promotes efﬁciency through sharing, but quality of service cannot be guaranteed,
which is a serious problem for some applications. Such applications may be better served by a real-time
secondary market , where secondary users ask the license-holder for temporary access to spectrum as needed.
Access is granted when and only when quality of service requirements can be met for both license-holderand secondary users. This paper quantitatively assesses real-time secondary markets for the special case of acellular license-holder. It demonstrates that many secondary users can access spectrum with little impact onthe primary cellular customers, and that cellular carriers proﬁt even if the price for secondary access is quitelow. Finally, it addresses the challenges of transferring funds from secondary user to license-holder.
r2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Spectrum licensing; Secondary market; Unlicensed spectrum; Shared spectrum; Underlay; Spectrum
scarcity
1. Introduction
There has been much discussion of an alleged shortage of spectrum, but simple scanning shows
that much of the usable spectrum is essentially idle at any given time. This inefﬁciency is the legacy
of spectrum regulations designed for old technology. Regulatory reform could unleash newARTICLE IN PRESS
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-412-268-7126.
E-mail addresses: peha@cmu.edu (J.M. Peha), sooksan@andrew.cmu.edu (S. Panichpapiboon).
1Professor of Electrical Engineering and Public Policy at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), Associate Director of
CMU Center for Wireless and Broadband Networks, www.ece.cmu.edu/ Bpeha.
2Graduate Student at Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
www.andrew.cmu.edu/ Bsooksan .
0308-5961/$-see front matter r2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2004.05.003technology that would help to alleviate spectrum scarcity. This paper focuses on the potential
beneﬁts of allowing real-time secondary markets for spectrum, which may be the next logical step
beyond the secondary markets recently considered by the US Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) (2000a,b, 2003) . These markets would fulﬁll a need not met by other
common regulatory paradigms, such as traditional licensing and unlicensed operation.
Whenever someone who needs a resource sporadically is given exclusive access to that resource,
some inefﬁciency is inevitable. This occurs with traditional licensing. For example, if a cellular
carrier has a license which guarantees exclusive access to a block of spectrum, then some capacity
will sit idle when the number of calls underway requires less than full capacity. This typically occurs
more than 98% of the time. It has been shown quantitatively that dividing a given block of
spectrum into separate exclusive blocks greatlyreduces the amount of trafﬁc (e.g. cellular telephone
calls per minute) that can be carried in this block ( Peha, 1997 ;Sirbu, Salgado, & Peha, 1997 ). Of
course, exclusive access does offer an advantage that is essential for some applications: guaranteed
quality of service. Indeed, licensing began so that a radio broadcaster or other spectrum-user could
build infrastructure without fear that others would later interfere with its transmissions.
Unlicensed spectrum offers the opposite traits. It forces spectrum sharing, thereby opening up
the possibility of much greater spectral efﬁciency. This efﬁciency is not guaranteed, since users
sharing a resource have less incentive to conserve it, and there are circumstances where this can
lead to tremendous inefﬁciencies. However, there are technical and regulatory methods to address
this problem, including an effective etiquette ( Satapathy & Peha, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2001, in press ).
Giving users the ability to deploy and move transmitters anywhere at any time without ﬁrst
obtaining a regulator’s permission has many other important advantages as well. Nevertheless,
there is no limit to the number of devices that may be simultaneously competing for unlicensedspectrum, so there is no way to guarantee quality of service, as is possible in licensed spectrum.
Different applications deserve different regulatory schemes ( Peha, 1998 ). Broadcast television is
well served with traditional licensing; the broadcasters want guaranteed quality of service, and
should be more than willing to pay the cost of licensing to get it. Moreover, transmissions are
continual at a constant data rate so exclusivity does not yield such inefﬁciency. On the other hand,
consumers who want (sporadic) broadband access to the Internet may be willing to surrender
their quality of service guarantees, so they can connect to their local ISP at little cost over
unlicensed spectrum. However, neither the typical licensed or unlicensed approaches quite ﬁt an
application that uses spectrum sporadically and requires guaranteed quality of service. Forexample, consider a television station that occasionally carries a live news event and needs a
wireless connection from the portable camera at the event back to the studio. This station cannot
risk interference during a live broadcast, so guaranteed quality of service is important. However,
giving the station exclusive access to spectrum for this purpose is highly inefﬁcient and costly,
because the spectrum would sit idle much of the time. As another example, there are Internet users
who prefer and are willing to pay for guaranteed quality of service on the connection to their ISP
(as provided by DSL), so they may not be happy with access over unlicensed spectrum. For
applications like these, this paper proposes real-time secondary markets which offer both the
efﬁciencies of sharing and the possibility of quality of service guarantees.
In this scheme, spectrum is licensed. Secondary devices gain the right to transmit by explicitly
requesting permission from the license-holder as needed. The license-holder grants permissiononly if doing so will not cause excessive interference with other calls that are already underway,ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 604and if the license-holder can promise the secondary device that the latter’s quality of service
requirements will be met, despite any transmission from the primary license-holder and from
other secondary devices. The license-holder can charge a fee for this, which provides license-holders with an incentive to share the spectrum, and it provides secondary users with an incentive
not to waste that spectrum.
Secondary access, where a secondary device is allowed to transmit if and only if it does not
interfere with the primary license-holder, is far from new. A secondary market is different. With
traditional secondary access, secondary users obtain permission to transmit from the regulator,
and not the license-holder. Moreover, the secondary user usually gets no quality of service
guarantees, because a primary user may need the spectrum. With a secondary market, guarantees
are possible, through explicit coordination between license-holder and secondary users.
The US FCC has lately been considering the possibility of secondary markets where license-
holders negotiate with secondary users ( FCC, 2000a,b ). Very recently ( FCC, 2003 ), they announced
that some forms of secondary markets will be allowed. The details are still forthcoming. At
minimum, this is an important step toward the vision described in this paper. The ﬁrst innovators
are likely to lease spectrum for months or years. However, these proceedings may not anticipate a
real-time market as discussed in this paper, where spectrum is leased for hours, minutes, or even
seconds. The announcement deﬁned a lease to be ‘‘short term’’ if it is under 360 days, and a license-
holder is expected to notify the FCC 21 days before a secondary user begins operation.
Any license-holder could consider making spectrum available in a real-time secondary market,
regardless of the reason for which the license-holder uses that spectrum. In the special case where
the primary license-holder does not use the spectrum at all, and only makes it available to
secondary devices, the secondary market considered here becomes identical to a band manager
scheme ( Peha, 1998, 2000 ). One challenge with the band manager approach when real-time access
is required is that a secondary device must be able to communicate with the band manager
whenever spectrum is desired, perhaps over a wireless link. This may force the band manager to
build costly infrastructure so there is always a transceiver near any secondary device. Some
license-holders already have that infrastructure in place, such as a cellular carrier. This paper
considers the case where the primary license-holder is a GSM-based cellular carrier that wants to
provide access to spectrum in a real-time secondary market. One objective of this work is to
quantitatively assess the potential impact on spectrum utilization of this kind of spectrum sharing.
In off-peak hours when few primary users are active, it is obvious that granting access tosecondary users makes sense, but what about peak hours? The paper shows that letting other
devices share the spectrum has only a small impact on the performance of the license-holder, and
that this sharing scheme is viable technically and economically.
Two technologies have emerged in recent years that make real-time secondary markets more
attractive, although neither is actually required. The ﬁrst is inexpensive global positioning system
technology (GPS), with which devices can determine their approximate locations. A license-holder
can use this location information to estimate when two devices might interfere with each other
before allowing a secondary device to transmit, which can be used to greatly increase frequency
reuse. The second emerging technology is software-deﬁned radio, which will make it possible for
relatively inexpensive devices to move from one frequency band to another. Thus, if a secondary
device cannot currently obtain the desired quality of service guaranteed in one frequency band,the device can jump to another band ( Shared Spectrum Company, 2000 ).ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 605New Internet payment systems also constitute an enabling technology by providing an easy
method for secondary users to pay the license-holder. The payment mechanism should allow a
secondary user to buy services while communicating only with the license-holder, and withoutcreating opportunities for fraud.
Section 2 provides a general description of the proposed scheme. Discussion of the precise
conditions for call admission takes place in Section 3. Section 4 quantitatively describes the
impact of secondary users on cellular customers, and related economic implications. Section 5
addresses the payment mechanism. Finally, the paper concludes in Section 6.
2. Basic model
A primary user is any license-holder that allows its spectrum to be shared by other devices at its
own discretion. Here, the paper examines the case where the primary user is a GSM-based cellularnetwork operator. A basic assumption is that the cellular carrier is capable of locating the position
of each primary device, which is consistent with the FCC’s E911 requirement ( FCC, 1996 ). A
number of techniques for locating a mobile device in a GSM network has been proposed ( Laitinen,
Lahteenmaki, & Nordstrom, 2001 ;Silventoinen & Rantalainen, 1996 ). The paper restricts itself to
thesimpler casewhere thebase station in one cell does notcoordinate withother cells. Coordination
could improve performance, so this is a conservative assumption to be relaxed in future work.
Two assumptions are made for secondary devices. First, secondary users only use downstream
channels of the cellular network. This is also a conservative assumption, effectively making only half
of the carrier’s spectrum available for sharing. Secondly, each secondary device has GPS capability.Some examples of applications that may be appropriate for secondary access are broadband wireless
last-mile or middle-mile Internet access, a microwave link and any point-to-point communications
that requires a guarantee of quality of service. The cellular base station must communicate with all
secondary devices in the cell that would like to transmit. The base station would obtain the following
information: the transmit power, the amount of bandwidth needed, the amount of tolerable
interference and the location. When communicating with a cellular network, a secondary user can
use the signaling channels already used by the cellular network or it can use an unlicensed band.
The secondary transmitters know all of the above information, with the possible exception of the
location of the secondary receivers. There are several ways for a base station to obtain this
information. The secondary transmitter could request the location of the secondary receiver by
communicating over unlicensed spectrum and then the secondary transmitter could include bothlocations when making its request to the cellular base station. Alternatively, the secondary
transmitter and the secondary receiver could independently register with a cellular base station. To
handle the case where the secondary transmitter and the secondary receiver are in different cells,
each primary base station would have to share this location information with other base stations.
3. Admission of primary calls
Depending on their locations, primary and secondary devices can sometimes coexist in the same
channel of the same cell. When this is possible, the secondary device has no impact on cellularARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 606users whatsoever. Analysis commences here by deﬁning precise conditions necessary for a primary
call to be admitted, and thus by determining when this form of frequency reuse is possible. (See
Panichpapiboon (2002) for analogous discussion of when a secondary call can be admitted.)
In admitting a new cellular call, the base station must make sure that the signal to interference
ratio (SIR) of the new primary call and the SIR of the secondary calls underway are adequate.
The assumption is that a base station uses a power control scheme, so the power transmitted by
the base station will vary with the location of the primary device, and the power of the received
signal will be constant, independent of location.
A blocking area is deﬁned as an area where primary devices are not able to share a channel or
channels with ongoing secondary calls. This can happen when the primary device is too close to
existing secondary users, and it can also happen when the distance between the primary device
and the base station is so great that the base station would have to transmit at a higher power thanongoing secondary calls could tolerate. The following analysis derives the minimum separation
required between a primary handset and a secondary user, and the maximum distance that a
primary handset can be from the base station. It will later use these two distances to calculate the
size of a blocking area.
Condition 1. SIR on the primary downlink must be adequate.
Let d
minbe a minimum distance required between a primary handset and a secondary
transmitter, such that the SIR of the downlink meets a threshold level X. Assuming that the signal
attenuates with distance to the power of nand perfect power control, the signal strength on the
primary downlink is Pmax/Cn, independent of the location of the primary device, where Cis a cell
radius, Pmaxis the maximum transmit power of a base station, and nis a path loss exponent. Since
Xis the SIR required by a primary device, it means that the ratio between the power a primary
device receives from the base station and the interference power must be less than X.I fa
secondary device transmits with power Pts, the interference power received by a primary device in
this case is Pts/dn
min:It follows that:
signal
interference¼Pmax =Cn
Pts=dn
min¼X: ð1Þ
Solving (1), dmincan be written as
dmin¼CXP ts
Pmax/C18/C191=n
: ð2Þ
Condition 2. SIR of an ongoing secondary call must be adequate.
LetZbe the tolerable interference of a secondary device and let wbe the distance between a
secondary device and a primary base station, then it is required that Ptb=wnpZ;where Ptbis the
power transmitted by the primary base station. Since power control is used, Ptbwill depend on the
distance between a primary device and the base station. As this distance increases, the power
transmitted by the base station increases. Let dmaxbe the maximum distance a primary handsetARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 607can be from the base station, such that SIR on the secondary link meets a threshold level Z. The
transmit power of the base station in this case is Ptb¼Pmax =Cn/C0/C1
dn
max :Consequently, the required
condition can be expressed as
Pmax =Cn/C0/C1
dn
max
wn¼Z: ð3Þ
Solving (3), dmaxcan be written as
dmax¼wCZ
Pmax/C18/C191=n
: ð4Þ
The blocking area created by a secondary user is the union of a circle with radius dmincentered
at a secondary transmitter and the area outside the circle with radius dmaxcentered at the base
station. As an example, see Fig. 1. In practice, there is often uncertainty in the location of devices,
so the measured distance between two devices may not equal the actual distance. To be
conservative, a device is in the blocking area if:
*measured distance between a device and the closest secondary transmitter odmin+E95,o rARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. Blocking area is the shaded region.J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 608*measured distance between a device and the closest base station > dmax+E05, where E05and
E95are the 5th and 95th percentile of the error in the distance measurement, respectively (as
calculated in Panichpapiboon, 2002 ). (Note that generally E05p0 and E95X0.)
4. Impact of secondary users on quality of service
This section quantiﬁes the impact of allowing secondary devices to use the spectrum licensed to
the cellular network. It evaluates the extent to which carriers would be forced to serve fewer
cellular customers, and whether carriers would have a ﬁnancial incentive to try this form of
spectrum sharing.
The assumption is that the system would operate at full capacity even without secondary users,
i.e. cellular customers are already experiencing the maximum tolerable blocking probability.
(Otherwise, the impact of secondary users could be negligible.) Cellular quality of service
(blocking probability) is not allowed to be degraded, so admitting secondary users means reducing
the number of primary customers. This reduction will be quantiﬁed.
Another assumption is that secondary devices are stationary during periods when they are using
spectrum. In addition, it is assumed for this analysis that the call holding time of a secondary callis much longer than that of the primary call. Consequently, the transient period after the
secondary call begins or ends can be ignored when calculating blocking probability of the cellular
calls, so steady-state analysis can be used in this paper. Blocking probability of cellular calls is
calculated as if primary devices are ﬁxed during the calls. Call arrivals of the primaries are
assumed to follow a Poisson process, call holding time is exponentially distributed, and primary
calls are uniformly distributed throughout the cell. A further assumption is that an internal
handoff, which is a handoff within a cell, is allowed. In other words, a primary call can be moved
from one channel to another at any time. Secondary devices are in randomly selected locations,
and here the assumption is that the location distributions of these transmitters are uniform andindependent. Results are achieved through simulation. (See Panichpapiboon (2002) for closed-
form analysis of the case where there is only one secondary call per cell at a time.)
For the simulation results in this section, the following values are used unless stated otherwise,
all of which are reasonable for a GSM network. The maximum transmit power of a base station is
30W. The cell radius is 2km. The path loss exponent is 3.5. The number of 200-kHz channels in
the cell is 41. The transmit power of each secondary device is 100mW, and each secondary call
requires 200kHz of bandwidth. The SIR required by a cellular call and a secondary call is 15dB.
Section 4.1 introduces key metrics for measuring system performance. In Section 4.2, system
performance is shown as derived with two different frequency assignment algorithms that will be
used in subsequent subsections. Section 4.3 evaluates the impact of inaccuracy in location
measurements. Finally, in Section 4.4, we quantitatively evaluate the economic implications ofsecondary users.
4.1. Metrics of performances
Three kinds of metrics are used in measuring how the sharing scheme affects the cellular
network: the expected call blocking probability of cellular calls, admissible trafﬁc load of cellularARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 609calls, and the minimum break-even rate , which is the per-minute rate that a carrier needs to charge
each secondary call in order to generate the same revenue as in the case where there is no sharing.
The expected call blocking probability is calculated by repeatedly running the simulation with
the same number of secondary calls in different locations and averaging the blocking probabilities
collected in all runs. In each run, a series of locations for secondary calls is randomly selected from
a uniform distribution. When a location is selected for which all channels are unavailable, a new
location is randomly selected. This is repeated until the desired number of secondary calls in the
cell is reached. In all the graphs presented, the expected call blocking probability has a 95%
conﬁdence interval that is within 75% of the value shown.
Admissible trafﬁc load is the amount of trafﬁc that a network can carry while maintaining a
constant quality of service for cellular customers, i.e. a constant expected call blocking
probability. The slope of the graph of admissible load from primary users versus the number ofsecondary users is an indicator of the opportunity cost of allocating spectrum to secondary users;
this slope is essential in the calculation of optimal pricing ( Wang, Peha, & Sirbu, 1997 ), although
optimal pricing is outside the scope of this paper. In all the graphs presenting admissible trafﬁc
load, the admissible trafﬁc load shown yields an expected call blocking probability between 1.95%
and 2.05%. Each expected call blocking probability is also accurate within 75% with a 95%
conﬁdence interval.
If no secondary calls are allowed, a cellular carrier operating at peak capacity with maximum
blocking probability Bwill have a revenue per minute of PA
0ð1/C0BÞ;where Pis a per-minute rate
that a carrier normally charges for a cellular call, and A0is the admissible trafﬁc load of cellular
calls when no secondary calls are present. (Blocked calls produce no revenue.) If Nsecondary calls
are underway, then revenue from cellular calls falls to PAð1/C0BÞ;where Ais admissible trafﬁc
load from cellular calls. However, each of the Nsecondary calls also yield revenue. Thus, for a
cellular carrier to gain the same revenue as in the case where there is no spectrum sharing, the
following equations must hold:
PA0ð1/C0BÞ¼PAð1/C0BÞþSN ; ð5Þ
S
P¼ð1/C0BÞðA0/C0AÞ
N; ð6Þ
where Sis the minimum break-even rate. The ratio in (6) is referred to as the ‘‘normalized
minimum break-even rate’’.
Note that Pis the expected revenue derived per minute from a single cellular user in a busy
hour, as this is the revenue lost when the number of cellular minutes is reduced. In service plans
where revenue is a complex combination of per-minute charges and ﬂat monthly fees, and where
some users want peak hour and some off-peak service, the revenue per minute in peak hour is
more difﬁcult to calculate.
4.2. Performance of frequency assignment algorithms
The effect of secondary devices on cellular call blocking probability depends in part on the
frequency assignment algorithm , which determines the frequency at which a secondary device will
operate. Two simple schemes are introduced: ‘‘First Available’’ (FA) and ‘‘Load Balancing’’ (LB).ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 610In the FA scheme, the network operator always scans the channels in the same order, and the ﬁrst
frequency found where interference is within the acceptable limit is assigned. In the LB scheme, in
contrast, the network operator tries to spread the number of secondary users equally on differentfrequencies by scanning channels in the order determined by the number of secondary calls
underway, beginning with the frequency where the number of secondary calls is smallest, and
assigning the ﬁrst frequency encountered where interference is within the acceptable limits.
It can be observed from Fig. 2that when there are few secondary calls in the cell, the LB scheme
performs better than the FA scheme. This is because in a situation when there are few secondary
calls, spreading items across all the frequencies enables the network to place most secondary
devices in channels where they can coexist with a cellular handset that is not in the blocking area,
which enhances the internal frequency reuse. However, as the number of secondary calls increases,
there will be more overlapping of blocking areas where multiple frequencies are unavailable to thecellular calls with the LB scheme. This will increase the blocking probability of cellular calls. A
scheme that considers the locations of secondary calls and not just the number of secondary calls
underway could perform even better. These superior admission control algorithms are an area for
further study.
4.3. Effects of inaccuracy in location measurements
Fig. 3compares the case where the standard deviation of displacement errors is 100m with the
case where there is no error. The accuracy level that is chosen for comparison is close to the one
that the FCC requires for commercial cellular carriers ( FCC, 1996 ). Even better positioning
accuracy is expected in the near future ( Bretz, 2000 ). The distances between a secondary
transmitter and a secondary receiver are 100 and 500m when the transmit powers of secondary
devices ( P
ts) are 100 and 500mW, respectively. Other parameters are the same as those in Fig. 2.
Only results with the LB scheme are shown in Fig. 3because it is better than the FA scheme in this
case (Panichpapiboon, 2002 ).ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 2. Effect of secondary calls on capacity of cellular customers, with both FA and LB frequency assignment schemes.J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 611It can be observed from this ﬁgure that with the accuracy level that current positioning
technology can already achieve, the scheme performs well, averting concern about GPS
inaccuracy. In addition, in the case where the transmit power of a secondary device is high, the
impact of positioning inaccuracy is negligible because the minimum separation required between a
cellular handset and a secondary transmitter becomes very large compared to the level ofinaccuracy.
4.4. Economic implications
InFig. 4, the scenario where a carrier offers secondary access service that can provide an ideal
bit rate of 1Mbps and a transmission distance of 500m is considered. Each secondary device
transmits at 100mW, and uses 200kHz of bandwidth, which has been shown to be effective values
in this scenario ( Panichpapiboon, 2002 ). The FA scheme is shown because it is better than the LB
scheme at this particular transmission distance and transmit power ( Panichpapiboon, 2002 ).
It can be observed that it is possible to offer inexpensive secondary access service and still
increase revenue. This is due to the fact that, in most cases, primary and secondary devices cancoexist in the same block of spectrum; therefore, a carrier gains additional revenue from
secondary access while serving a primary user. The amount that a carrier needs to charge each
secondary call is only about one-third of the rate it would normally charge a cellular call.
Moreover, the curve looks relatively ﬂat, which suggests that a carrier does not have to get many
secondary customers before it can break even.
InFig. 5, the secondary transmit power that minimizes the expected blocking probability of
cellular calls for each transmission distance is used. There are 10 secondary calls underway in the
cell. Other parameters are the same as those in Fig. 4. Again, only the FA scheme is shown
because it is better in all the transmission distances and transmit powers considered in this
scenario ( Panichpapiboon, 2002 ).ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 3. A comparison between two levels of accuracy in location measurement (LB scheme).J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 612A carrier can proﬁtably offer an inexpensive secondary access service at any transmission
distance. Even if the transmission distance is as high as 1km, the carrier only needs to charge
about two-thirds the per-minute rate it would normally charge a cellular call. Moreover, the
normalized minimum break-even rate increases roughly linearly as the transmission distance
increases, even with the assumption of an omnidirectional antenna, so the area affected by the
secondary transmitter increases with distance squared.
InFig. 6, the combination of SIR and bandwidth is chosen that yields the desired bit rate and
minimizes the expected call blocking probability of cellular calls. Other parameters are the same asARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 4. Normalized minimum break-even rate when transmission distance is 500m, and each device transmits at
100mW (FA scheme).
Fig. 5. Normalized minimum break-even rate at different transmission distances when each device transmits at optimalpower.J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 613those of Fig. 4. It can be observed that the normalized minimum break-even rate increases
linearly when the bit rate is between 1 and 2Mbps. However, it looks ﬂat when the bit rate is
above 3Mbps. This is because the system is at the point where the required SIR of each
secondary call is so high that each GSM channel can only accommodate one secondary call and
no primary calls can share the channel. Hence, there is no interference from the secondary user’sperspective.
5. Payment mechanism
License-holders will obviously need payment from secondary users to justify the added
complication, and the slight loss in revenue from primary users. If software-deﬁned radios allow
secondary users to jump from band to band, secondary markets will be most efﬁcient if any carrier
can accept payment from any secondary user and any secondary user can make payment to any
carrier. Thus, some kind of payment system standard would be helpful. The payment system
should have the following properties.
*It should not be necessary for a secondary user to communicate directly with an agent of thepayment system. In many cases, the secondary user will have no communications links
available other than the signaling channel to the license-holder, which in this case means a short
wireless link to the cellular base station.
*To prevent secondary users from fraudulently obtaining services, it must be possible todetermine remotely that the payment is good, perhaps by authenticating the secondary user
using public key encryption, or perhaps by authenticating the payment itself. The latter
approach where the payment rather than the payer is scrutinized is appropriate for a ‘‘digital
cash’’ system, where a bit string has value because it has been ‘‘minted’’ (or digitally signed) byARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 6. Normalized minimum break-even rate at different bit rate.J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 614a bank ( Chaum, Fiat, & Naor, 1985 ;Peha & Khamitov, 2003 ). In such a system, the payee
requires no knowledge of the payer, which is an advantage in this context.
*Transactions should generate records that cannot be altered without detection, perhaps using
digital signatures, so any disputes can be resolved, and fraud can be detected.
Payment systems have emerged in recent years with these properties. In particular, digital cash
systems are well suited to meeting the ﬁrst two conditions, where the payer has no direct
connection with the payment system but all payments are validated. There is one such system
called Pay Cash ( Peha & Khamitov, 2003 ) that offers the strongest protection against disputes
through its tamper-proof records. This is accomplished through a unique approach that
inextricably links a piece of electronic cash to the associated transaction record. Without such a
link, a service-provider might claim that a particular service was never paid for, and that any
payment made by that customer was actually for a previous service. Conversely, a customer can
falsely claim that another payment was really for this service.
The link between cash and transaction record is achieved as follows ( Peha & Khamitov, 2003 ).
Electronic cash systems typically associate serial numbers with electronic cash, so the system can
block attempts to spend the same cash twice. In Pay Cash, this serial number is also a public key,and the corresponding secret key is used to sign the agreement between payer and payee which
will eventually become part of the transaction record.
6. Conclusion
Licensing spectrum gives license-holders some exclusivity, thereby guaranteeing quality of
service, but exclusivity also leads to inefﬁcient use of spectrum. Unlicensed bands promotesharing, but do not provide adequate quality of service for some applications. Each of these
regulatory paradigms have their place, but for applications that require sporadic access to
spectrum and for which quality of service guarantees are important, licensed spectrum with real-
time secondary markets may be the best solution.
In this scheme, primary and secondary spectrum users share spectrum, thereby increasing
spectral efﬁciency and alleviating spectrum scarcity. Unlike today’s bands that allow secondary
access, primary and secondary users would coordinate directly, making it possible to protect
quality of service for both primary and secondary users. In this explicit coordination, the license-
holder runs an admission control algorithm, which only allows secondary users access to spectrum
when quality of service of both primary and secondary would be adequate. The license-holder also
uses an intelligent frequency assignment algorithm for determining the frequency at which a
secondary user should be allowed to operate. Coordination also gives the license-holder an
opportunity to charge a fee, which provides incentives to maximize spectrum utilization.
Moreover, secondary users dynamically request access to spectrum when and only when spectrum
is needed, whether it is needed for 1s or 1h.
If secondary devices are equipped with GPS receivers, the admission control and frequency
assignment algorithms can allow a great deal of frequency reuse without excessive interference. In
effect, by increasing frequency reuse, this technology increases the economy of scope of
offering these two different services on the same infrastructure. If secondary devices also employARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 615software-deﬁned radios to jump from band to band, these devices can seek out a band that is
currently free, signiﬁcantly increasing the likelihood that spectrum will be available to secondary
devices when needed with negligible impact on license-holders.
For the special case where the license-holder is a GSM-based cellular carrier, the paper has
quantitatively demonstrated that secondary users can have little impact on a license-holder, so a
license-holder can allow many secondary users to operate while reducing the number of cellular
customers only slightly, and without reducing quality of service. These results were achieved with
two simple frequency assignment algorithms and sharing only in with downstream cellular links,
so it is clear that even better results are possible. In all, 100m of inaccuracy in the positioning
technology does not signiﬁcantly undermine the performance of this scheme. Moreover, accuracy
in these devices is likely to improve in coming years ( Bretz, 2000 ).
The paper further shows that the cellular carrier proﬁts from this arrangement even if the price
for secondary access is quite low. Moreover, the minimum break-even price is relatively insensitive
to the number of secondary users, so it is not necessary to get a large number of such customers
before this approach becomes economically viable.
It should be noted that the only cost considered in the present analysis is the opportunity cost of
using spectrum for secondary instead of primary users. There would of course be other costs,
ranging from additional capital investment in equipment to marketing of this new service.
The results also indicate that the break-even price of secondary access would be roughly
proportional to bandwidth, and to distance from secondary transmitter to receiver. The latter is
somewhat surprising because the model used omnidirectional antennas, so the area covered is
proportional to distance squared.
Finally, the paper addressed the challenge of transferring funds from secondary user to license-
holder. It describes some of the requirements of a settlement mechanism for this environment,
where there may be multiple license-holders and secondary users with different technologies, and
where secondary devices have no direct connection to an infrastructure that would allow payment.
The paper presented one system called Pay Cash ( Peha & Khamitov, 2003 ) that can overcome
these challenges with a digital currency.
Carriers beneﬁt from the ability to offer a new revenue-generating service. Secondary users
obviously beneﬁt, because they get access to spectrum that would otherwise be unavailable with a
quality guarantee. Even cellular customers would probably beneﬁt in the end, since added demand
from any kind of customer will cause the carrier to expand capacity, which tends to drive cost percustomer down. However, this requires analysis which is beyond the scope of this paper. If
everyone could beneﬁt, real-time secondary markets clearly deserve serious consideration.
Before opening the doors for real-time secondary markets of this kind, regulators must make sure
that the license-holder can be held accountable if a secondary user fails to follow regulatory
constraints. For example, what happens if a secondary device transmits at a greater power than is
allowed,andwho is liable, and howcan theoffendingparty beidentiﬁed?Itis notpractical tonotify
theregulatoreverytime a secondary userrequests access to spectrum. Itcouldbesufﬁcientto obtain
a permit from the regulator to be a secondary user in a number of bands and at any time(s) in the
coming year. The authentication mechanisms built into the payment system could be used to verify
that this user really does have a permit. Perhaps this process can be bypassed entirely when a
secondary user has equipment that has already been approved by the regulator to operate as asecondary user in a given set of frequency bands. This issue also deserves further investigation.ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 616Regulators must also determine exactly what rights can be granted to secondary users, at least
in bands where the license-holder does not have complete ﬂexibility. For example, if a license-
holder is restricted to FM broadcasting, can it allow secondary users to establish temporary point-to-point microwave links in its frequency allocation? Doing so could change the interference
landscape for systems in adjacent frequency bands, systems in nearby regions, or systems that
might someday share the same frequency band and geographic region with an FM broadcaster
through traditional secondary access. Before allowing real-time secondary markets, the regulator
must either grant the license-holder complete ﬂexibility, which in effect grants considerably more
spectrum resources (without an auction or the usual consideration), or the regulator must
carefully devise technical constraints on the behavior of secondary users in the band. This is also
an area that deserves further study—on a band-by-band basis.
References
Bretz, E. A. (2000). X marks the spot, maybe. IEEE Spectrum ,37(4), 26–36.
Chaum, D., Fiat, A., & Naor, N. (1985). Transaction systems to make big brother obsolete. Communications of the
ACM,28(5), 1030–1044.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (1996). FCC adopts rules to implement enhanced 911 for wireless services .
FCC News Release.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2000a). Secondary markets spectrum initiative policy statement . Policy
Statement (FCC 00-401), November 9.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2000b). Promoting efﬁcient use of spectrum through elimination of
barriers to the development of secondary markets . Notice of Proposed Rule Making (FCC 00-402), November 9.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2003). FCC adopts spectrum leasing rules and streamlined processing for
license transfer and assignment applications, and proposes further steps to increase access to spectrum through
secondary markets . FCC News Release.
Laitinen, H., Lahteenmaki J., & Nordstrom, T. (2001). Database correlation method for GSM location. Proceedings of
the vehicular technology conference (pp. 2504–2508).
Panichpapiboon, S. (2002). Providing secondary access to licensed spectrum through coordination . Master’s thesis,
Carnegie Mellon University, 2002.
Peha, J. M. (1997). Developing equipment and services for shared spectrum: Is it a good gamble? Proceedings of the
international engineering consortium annual review of communications (pp. 955–958).
Peha, J. M. (1998). Spectrum management policy options. IEEE Communications Surveys ,1(1), 2–8.
Peha, J. M. (2000). Wireless communications and coexistence for smart environments. IEEE Personal Communications ,
7(7), 66–68.
Peha, J. M., & Khamitov, I. M. (2003). Pay cash: A secure efﬁcient Internet payment system. Proceedings of the ﬁfth
international conference on electronic commerce .
Satapathy, D. P., & Peha, J. M. (1997). Performance of unlicensed devices with a spectrum etiquette. Proceedings of the
IEEE GLOBECOM (pp. 1645–1649).
Satapathy, D. P., & Peha, J. M. (1998). Etiquette modiﬁcations for unlicensed spectrum: Approach and impact.
Proceedings of the IEEE vehicular technology conference (pp. 272–276).
Satapathy, D. P., & Peha, J. M. (2000). A novel co-existence algorithm for unlicensed ﬁxed power devices. Proceedings
of the IEEE wireless communications and networking conference (pp. 1403–1409).
Satapathy, D. P., & Peha, J. M. (2001). A novel co-existence algorithm for unlicensed variable power devices.
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on communications (pp. 2845–2849).
Satapathy, D. P., & Peha, J. M. (in press). Dangers of excessive resource consumption in unlicensed spectrum. ACM
Wireless Networks .
Shared Spectrum Company. (2000). Comments of Shared Spectrum Company. Response to FCC Docket No. 00-47.ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 617Silventoinen, M. I., & Rantalainen, T. (1996). Mobile station emergency locating in GSM. Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on personal wireless communications (pp. 232–238).
Sirbu, M., Salgado, H., & Peha, J. M. (1997). A narrow band approach to efﬁcient PCS spectrum sharing through
decentralized DCA access policies. IEEE Personal Communications ,4(1), 24–34.
Wang, Q., Peha, J. M., & Sirbu, M. A. (1997). Optimal pricing for integrated-services networks. In J. Bailey, & K.
McKnight (Eds.), Internet economics (pp. 353–376). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 603–618 618