Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  1 Sharing Spectrum through Spectrum Policy Reform 
and Cognitive Radio 1 
 
Jon M. Peha 
Carnegie Mellon University 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Traditionally, interference protection is guarantee d through a policy of spectrum 
licensing, whereby wireless systems get exclusive a ccess to spectrum.  This is an 
effective way to prevent interference, but it leads  to highly inefficient use of spectrum.  
Cognitive radio along with software radio, spectrum  sensors, mesh networks, and other 
emerging technologies can facilitate new forms of s pectrum sharing that greatly improve 
spectral efficiency and alleviate scarcity, if poli cies are in place that support these forms 
of sharing.  On the other hand, new technology that  is inconsistent with spectrum policy 
will have little impact.  This paper discusses poli cies that can enable or facilitate use of 
many spectrum-sharing arrangements, where spectrum- sharing arrangements are 
categorized as being based on coexistence  or cooperation , and as sharing among equals  
or primary-secondary sharing .  A shared spectrum band may be managed directly b y the 
regulator, or this responsibility may be delegated in large part to a license-holder.  The 
type of sharing arrangement and the entity that man ages it have great impact on which 
technical approaches are viable and effective.  The  most efficient and cost-effective form 
of spectrum sharing will depend on the type of syst ems involved, where systems under 
current consideration are as diverse as television broadcasters, cellular carriers, public 
safety systems, point-to-point links, and personal and local-area networks.  In addition, 
while cognitive radio offers policy-makers the oppo rtunity to improve spectral efficiency, 
cognitive radio also provides new challenges for po licy enforcement.  A responsible 
regulator will not allow a device into the marketpl ace that might harm other systems.  
Thus, designers must seek innovative ways to assure  regulators that new devices will 
comply with policy requirements and will not cause harmful interference. 
 
 
Keywords:  spectrum sharing, spectrum policy, cogni tive radio, band manager, 
unlicensed, etiquette, opportunistic access, interr uptible access, secondary spectrum 
market, commons 
                                                 
1 The author gratefully acknowledges the financial su pport of CyLab, ARO, and Intel Corp.  Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  2 I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
When airplanes were new, pilots flew as they please d, without risk of midair 
collision.  As more planes shared the skies, the ne ed grew for communications and 
cooperation among pilots. Today, hundreds of planes  can fly just a few meters apart in 
perfect formation through complex maneuvers, all wi thout collision.  This could never 
occur without the technological advances that made precision flying possible, but 
technology alone would have accomplished little.  B efore planes could be so densely 
packed, it was necessary to invent new rules that g overn how pilots fly and interact with 
each other. 
 
Similarly, as the density or wireless transmitters grew, rudimentary coordination 
in the form of policy became essential.  In most pr ime spectrum, licensing gave 
communications systems exclusive access to blocks o f spectrum, thereby almost 
eliminating the danger of harmful interference, but  leaving the majority of this spectrum 
idle when and where the license-holder is not activ e [1].  A few bands were designated 
for unlicensed devices with few restrictions, but w ith power limits that generally kept 
utilization low enough to limit mutual interference  (although utilization and serious 
interference problems sometimes grow over time).  T hese approaches were reasonably 
effective as a means of limiting interference probl ems, and appropriate for the technology 
of their time.  However, overwhelming demand for wi reless products and services 
motivates us to support a greater density of wirele ss devices through adoption of new 
technology and policy.  Emerging technology, includ ing cognitive radio [2], mesh 
networks, location technologies, spectrum sensors, and even micropayment schemes will 
make this possible, if and only if we simultaneousl y develop spectrum policies that make 
effective use of the new technology. 
 
Wireless technology that is irreconcilable with imp ortant policy concerns, or that 
was implicitly designed for the wrong policy enviro nment, is of no practical value.  With 
something as potentially revolutionary as cognitive  radio, it is easy for designers to make 
this mistake.  For example, some cognitive radio sy stems considered by researchers are 
based on the assumption that all devices fully coop erate to reduce interference, even 
when these devices are owned and operated by countl ess independent users.  While this is 
not impossible with corresponding policy reform, de signers who do not realize that they 
are implicitly proposing a dramatic change in polic y may be disappointed in the limited 
impact of their technical innovations.  Even when n ew technology is compatible with 
current spectrum policy, that technology may be pro hibited because wise regulators are 
necessarily cautious about allowing new devices tha t may have unintended impact on 
existing systems. 
 
Successful innovation requires consideration of the  entire system , where a system 
includes wireless technology, spectrum policy, and the human beings who interact with 
both.  This includes feasible and cost-effective te chnical mechanisms through which 
devices can minimize the interference they cause (a nd perhaps maximize the interference 
they tolerate).  It also includes the incentive str ucture that would convince the designers 
and users of wireless devices to reduce the interfe rence they cause others.  Regulators Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  3 must define rules that facilitate use of those mech anisms that are effective and mutually 
compatible, deter use of mechanisms that are ineffe ctive or incompatible with other 
systems in the given band, and still allow enough f lexibility to encourage innovation.  At 
the same time, regulators must ensure the rules tha t unleash new technologies while 
controlling interference are legally and technicall y enforceable.  Otherwise, the new 
technologies are not ready for use. 
 
Increased spectrum sharing is essential to addressi ng today’s serious scarcity of 
available spectrum.  This paper will discuss a rang e of spectrum policies that can make 
novel forms of spectrum sharing possible, and a tax onomy to better understand those 
forms of spectrum sharing.  We will also discuss th e implications of these policies and 
spectrum-sharing arrangements for various technolog ies, with an emphasis on cognitive 
radio that befits this special issue of the Proceedings of the IEEE .  Indeed, cognitive radio 
is in part in a race with other technical approache s for ascendance in spectrum sharing.  
Note that the pros and cons of various categories of  spectrum-sharing, as well as the 
taxonomy proposed in this paper which defines these  categories, represent the views of 
the author.  This paper addresses many highly conte ntious issues for which there is no 
consensus opinion. 
 
In a given spectrum band, adoption of one form of s pectrum-sharing usually 
precludes many other sharing possibilities.  Since policy must change slowly to protect 
legacy systems, a policy decision in favor of one f orm typically precludes the alternatives 
for many years.  For example, allowing unlicensed d evices to operate in the “white 
spaces” of TV spectrum [3], i.e. in a TV channel bu t far from any TV tower operating in 
that channel, precludes the possibility of offering  licenses to those who would share with 
TV broadcasters in a different manner [4].  Thus, t he policy and technical communities 
must make hard choices.  The good news is that they  can (and should) make different 
choices in different bands.   
 
Section 2 will describe the basic features by which  spectrum-sharing schemes can 
best be defined.  Section 3 uses these features to present and categorize a wide range of 
new spectrum-sharing paradigms, and their implicati ons for both policy and technology.  
Section 4 addresses the important question of who g overns spectrum policy within a 
given band, which also has implications for technic al design.  Issues of policy 
enforcement are discussed in Section 5, and the pap er is concluded in Section 6. 
 
 
II.  DEFINING FEATURES OF SPECTRUM-SHARING 
PARADIGMS 
 
We argue that a sharing arrangement can be well cha racterized and categorized by 
two defining features [5, 6].  The first is whether  sharing is based on cooperation or 
coexistence.  The distinction has profound implications for both policy and technology.  
In a model based on cooperation, even devices under  different administrative control 
must communicate and cooperate with each other to a void mutual interference.  Among Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  4 other things, this means a common protocol must be defined, and must be supported by 
all  systems in the band.  With a coexistence model, de vices try to avoid interference 
without explicit signaling.  At most, devices sense  each other’s presence as interference.  
As can be seen throughout this special issue, cogni tive radio is a powerful tool for sharing 
based on coexistence; the ability to reconfigure a device based on the sensed interference 
levels from neighbors is valuable when avoiding mut ual interference [7, 8, 9].  With a 
cooperative model, devices may react to what they a re specifically told, and this ability to 
independently sense the environment may or may not be important, depending on the 
scheme. 
 
Both approaches have their place.  Where devices ca n exchange information that 
would otherwise be unavailable, we would expect the se devices to make more efficient 
use of spectrum while better avoiding mutual interf erence [10].  However, cooperation 
has its drawbacks.  Thanks to hidden terminals and other pragmatic concerns, 
communications may not always be possible.  The nee d for interaction can also impose 
transaction costs, including device complexity, del ay, and communications overhead, 
perhaps even to the extent that such costs outweigh  the benefits of cooperation [11].  
Moreover, the need for a common protocol in coopera tive sharing forces a degree of 
homogeneity among devices that can inhibit innovati on.  This is also a problem when 
attempting to share spectrum with legacy equipment,  which was not designed or 
deployed with new sharing arrangements in mind.  Fo rcing systems with no trust 
relationship to cooperate also poses complex securi ty challenges.  Such tradeoffs will be 
further apparent in the next section, when we discu ss specific sharing models.  Further 
research will determine when coexistence is prefera ble and when cooperation is 
preferable.  In many cases, extensive use of one wi thin a given band makes the other 
impractical, if not impossible.  
 
The second defining feature of a spectrum-sharing a rrangement in the proposed 
taxonomy is whether the arrangement comprises sharing among equals  or primary-
secondary sharing [5, 6].  In the latter case, some systems have the right to operate as a 
primary spectrum-user, and policy mandates that sec ondary devices are not allowed to 
cause harmful interference to a primary system.  In  the former case, all devices have 
equal rights, and typically more flexibility about how to behave in the presence of peers. 
As a result, an important question wherever sharing  among equals takes places is whether 
all systems have incentive to limit the interferenc e they cause to others.  Cognitive radio 
is most often discussed as a tool for primary-secon dary sharing, but if designed in 
accordance with an appropriate policy, cognitive ra dios may prove useful for sharing 
among equals as well. 
 
Probably the most commonly used descriptive feature  for a class of wireless 
devices is whether they are licensed  or unlicensed .  Note that this applies to a set of 
systems within a spectrum-sharing arrangement, and not to the arrangement itself.  As we 
will see in Section 3, primary devices can be licen sed or unlicensed, and secondary 
devices can be licensed or unlicensed.  A licensed system must get permission from the 
regulator to operate within a given frequency band.   The licensing process is an 
opportunity for the regulator to ensure exclusive a ccess to a block of spectrum if it wishes, Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  5 which is strong protection from the problems of int erference and congestion.  In contrast, 
unlicensed devices need no permission from the regu lator to deploy a device.  Devices 
can typically be deployed anywhere, which means the re is no limit to the number of 
devices that might be operating in a given location .   
 
 
III.  MODELS FOR SPECTRUM SHARING 
 
This section presents the policies underlying a wid e range of spectrum-sharing 
models.  Section 3.1 addresses the “commons” models , in which many devices are 
allowed to share spectrum as primary users.  Sectio n 3.2 discusses how secondary 
devices can share spectrum with a primary license-h older.  Building on Sections 3.1 and 
3.2, the methods by which these secondary systems s hare with each other are discussed in 
Section 3.3.  Section 3.4 discusses sharing among e quals for a limited number of regional 
providers, rather than a potentially unlimited numb er of localized systems.  The 
taxonomy is summarized in Section 3.5 
 
A.  Sharing Among Equal Primary Devices 
 
Some of the most heated debates over spectrum polic y in the last few years have 
been over the creation of new spectrum “commons.”  In any commons model, spectrum 
is shared, and no one is given clear priority. As d iscussed in Section 2, policy can 
prescribe devices that cooperate or devices that me rely coexist.  While both possibilities 
are sometimes lumped together under the ambiguous h eading of “commons,” the two are 
fundamentally different.  (Unfortunately, this conf usion over definitions has made much 
of the debate about spectrum commons meaningless, a s advocates and opponents based 
their arguments on incompatible definitions.)   [5,  6].   
 
The coexistence model exists today in many (but not  all) nations, and has spurred 
tremendous innovation and productivity, as is demon strated by the popularity of WiFi 
and cordless phones [12].  Many of these devices we re born because of the creation of 
new unlicensed spectrum bands, or to be more precise, bands where devices are “licensed 
by rule.”  In other words, any device that complies  with the regulator’s rules can be 
deployed without explicit permission.  (Equivalentl y, a regulator can explicitly grant an 
unlimited number of nonexclusive licenses with some  rules associated with these licenses, 
such as the requirement to use contention-based alg orithms in the 3650-3700 MHz band 
within the US [13].)  Unlicensed spectrum has many advantages [14, 15].  It requires 
spectrum sharing, which can potentially lead to gre ater spectral efficiency than exclusive 
access, where spectrum often sits idle because the license-holder is not transmitting.  
Unlicensed spectrum is necessary to support entire systems that are mobile or portable, 2 
such as a group of laptops that form an ad hoc wire less local-area network wherever they 
                                                 
2 This category of mobile or portable systems does n ot include systems that consist of fixed infrastruc ture, 
and mobile devices that work only when in the area served by fixed infrastructure, e.g. cellular syste ms. Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  6 happen to be.  It is useful for inexpensive low-pow er consumer products such as cordless 
phones, where the cost of coordination and licensin g would probably far exceed the cost 
of the equipment, and the interference impact on ne ighbors is small.   
 
Of course, a commons based on coexistence necessari ly comes with the risk of 
mutual interference.  In today’s unlicensed bands, there is no limit to the number of 
devices in a given location, and no limit to the po tential congestion. This is one reason 
such bands are typically limited to low-power devic es.  Cost-effective market-based 
methods have been suggested [16] but not adopted th at would allow the regulator to limit 
the number of devices deployed in a nation if inter ference proves problematic, without 
imposing additional constraints beyond the traditio nal unlicensed paradigm, but even that 
does not prevent all of the devices in a nation fro m appearing in the same place.  
Consequently, only applications and devices that do  not require quality of service 
guarantees, such as wireless local-area networks, s hould be deployed in these unlicensed 
bands.   
 
Use of devices that detect each other’s presence an d change behavior accordingly, 
such as those using cognitive radio, could reduce t he problems of mutual interference.  
But would such techniques ever be deployed in a coe xistent commons?  The success of 
this approach probably depends on the policies that  prevail in the band.  As described in 
Section 2, it is not sufficient with sharing among equals for devices to have the technical 
ability to reduce the interference they cause to ot hers.  Users and designers of these 
devices must also have the right incentives. Some e ngineers may design “greedy” devices, 
i.e. devices that transmit with greater power, dura tion, or bandwidth than necessary [15].  
When choosing between improving the performance, co st, or battery life of my device, 
versus conserving our spectrum and reducing interference inflicted on som e stranger’s 
device, there is a natural tendency to choose the f ormer.  In the extreme, the presence of 
greedy devices can lead to a tragedy of the commons , where many devices consume too 
much of the shared resource, and all devices in the  band experience inadequate 
performance as a result [17, 15, 18].  For example,  in the 1990s, the US Federal 
Communications Commission established an unlicensed  band in which all devices must 
comply with a “listen-before-talk” (LBT) requiremen t.  We have shown using game 
theory that under some circumstances, devices in th is band could improve their own 
performance by transmitting for longer durations th an necessary.  Moreover, if one 
device chooses to be greedy in this manner, a neigh boring device would optimize its own 
performance by being considerably more greedy than the first, potentially leading to an 
escalation of overconsumption that severely degrade s the performance of all [15, 18].  
Similar problems can occur when greedy devices tran smit at greater power than 
necessary, as shown in [19], or when they use more bandwidth than necessary.   
 
The dangers of greed can be addressed in two ways.  One option is to keep 
spectrum utilization sufficiently low that performa nce is good, and there is little incentive 
for greed.  This might be done through power limits , deployment fees, wideband 
allocations, or other means.  The other option is t o build incentives to conserve spectrum 
and reduce interference to neighbors into the techn ical rules of operation defined by the 
regulator, which as shown in [15, 20, 19], has the effect of changing the game’s incentive Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  7 structure.  For example, a device that has been tra nsmitting for a long time or at high 
power might be required to defer to other devices b y delaying its next transmission until 
it senses the channel to be idle throughout a fairl y long monitoring period.  These 
regulator-imposed rules, which are known as an etiquette , do not define how devices 
must be designed, but they impose some constraints on design.  A well-designed etiquette 
could unleash the power of cognitive radio to impro ve spectral efficiency in unlicensed 
bands.  On the other hand, a poorly designed etique tte may lead to ineffective designs, or 
slow technical innovation.  
 
The characteristics of a commons based on cooperati on are quite different [5, 6, 
21, 22].   In this commons, policy dictates that al l devices will actively communicate and 
cooperate, even though they serve different owners.   At minimum, devices can negotiate 
with each other for the right to transmit without c ollision.  For greater benefits, devices 
might autoconfigure into a mesh network, and carry each other’s traffic.  It has been 
shown theoretically that cooperation can lead to cooperative gain, i.e. the capacity in the 
system can actually increase with the number of act ive devices [21, 23, 24].  As more 
devices are added, the mean distance between device s decreases, allowing devices to 
transmit at lower power, thereby conserving spectru m.  Thus, users of a commons based 
on cooperation need not fear oversubscription as mu ch as users of a commons based on 
coexistence.  Another advantage of this approach is  that when devices from many owners 
combine to form a single infrastructure for all, th is fundamentally changes the economics 
of wide-area coverage.  Thus, for example, a cooper ative approach might make it cost-
effective to cover a large region in which today’s WiFi-based microcellular systems 
would not be financially sustainable, as discussed in [25]. 
 
The potential benefits of a cooperative commons are  great, and so are the 
challenges, which transcend technology and policy.  Once again, with sharing among 
equals, we must consider the incentives of the user s and designers of devices.  When 
devices delay their own transmissions for another, or carry each other’s traffic, some 
altruism is required, e.g. one device might increas e delays for its own traffic and drain its 
own battery by transmitting a stranger’s packet.  F or example, we have shown that 
devices can manipulate today’s routing protocols to  avoid carrying traffic for other 
devices, thereby improving their own performance, a nd it is only possible to detect such 
behavior with non-standard protocol modifications [ 26].  Even worse, a malicious node 
may take deliberate steps to disrupt the network, a nd in some proposed cooperative 
schemes, the impact of malicious behavior could be great.  Unless adequate technical and 
policy safeguards are devised to address these prob lems, the cooperative commons will 
have limited application. 
 
Another inherent challenge that is unique to the co operative commons is that all 
devices must share a detailed communications protoc ol.   A device should not be 
deployed in the band unless it can communicate usin g this protocol.  Traditional 
voluntary standards will not suffice.  Who will spe cify this protocol, and make changes to 
it over time as technology evolves?  This difficult  challenge will be discussed further in 
Section 5 which addresses who must be in charge, an d Section 6 which addresses 
enforcement. Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  8  
Note that when defining a sharing arrangement in a g iven band, one must choose 
between cooperation and coexistence. The technologi es underlying these policies are 
quite different, and each has its own set of techni cal challenges.  Those who champion 
cognitive radio will probably find greater use for their ideas in a coexistence regime, 
although there can be applications with cooperation  as well [2]. 
 
B.  Sharing Between Primary and Secondary 
 
Primary-secondary sharing is probably most useful w hen the primary system has 
been given exclusive rights through licensing, as t here are generally times and/or 
locations where other devices could transmit in thi s spectrum without causing harmful 
interference.  Once again, sharing can take one of two forms:  cooperation or coexistence 
[5, 6].   
 
When sharing is based on coexistence, secondary dev ices are essentially invisible 
to the primary.  Thus, all of the complexity of sha ring is borne by the secondary.   No 
changes to the primary system are needed, which is especially good for legacy systems 
that are difficult to change.  Before any secondary  devices can be deployed, rules must be 
established to protect the primary.  Secondary devi ces can either be allowed to transmit at 
such low power that they never cause harmful interf erence to the primary, as with 
ultrawideband [27], or they can be allowed to trans mit opportunistically when and only 
when they determine that transmissions will not cau se harmful interference [7].  
Opportunistic access is probably inadequate for app lications that require guaranteed 
quality of service, and therefore guaranteed prompt  access to spectrum.  However, many 
applications can benefit from opportunistic access.  
 
The challenges of opportunistic access are well sui ted to cognitive radio 
combined with spectrum sensors.  Alternatively, it is possible to ensure that a 
secondary transmitter is sufficiently far from prim ary receivers using a location 
technology such as the global positioning system (G PS) in combination with a 
database containing the locations of primary device s.  The secondary device also 
needs a method of retrieving the inevitable changes  to this database, and the device 
must stop all transmissions if its database is too far out of date.   This database might 
be extended to a full radio environment map [28], w hich also includes information on 
spectrum policy, available services, geography, and  even path loss. 
 
Proponents of opportunistic access must overcome se veral technical challenges; 
the first is proving that primary systems will be p rotected. At present, this battle is being 
fought over opportunistic access to the “white spac e” in television spectrum.  The US 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has tentati vely ruled in favor of this form of 
sharing after the 2009 transition to digital televi sion [3], although many of the details 
remain undecided, and for better or worse, there is  still time for a change in course.  Two 
prototype devices have already been submitted to th e FCC for evaluation [29].   
 Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  9 In policy circles, the debate has often focused on the technical question of 
whether secondary devices do or do not interfere wi th television, which is clearly the 
wrong question.  All transmissions cause interferen ce.  The appropriate question is 
whether this interference rises to the level of harmful interference , which is not a purely 
technical question [30].  Interference is harmful i f it is great enough to cause a significant 
disruption in service.  This definition of harmful interference is much easier to apply 
when the primary system operates effectively as lon g as the signal to noise ratio (SNR) 
exceeds an established threshold, and one can demon strate that this threshold is greatly 
exceeded.  Unfortunately, broadcast technologies li ke television do not work that way.  
There is always an edge to coverage area, where SNR is at the minimum acceptable level.  
The slightest interference is harmful for a receive r at that exact location. The question 
then becomes how much coverage area can be lost bef ore interference is considered 
harmful?  [4]  10%?  1%?  0.1%?  This is a non-tech nical and largely subjective question.  
Moreover, the problem is compounded by the notoriou s difficulty of predicting the exact 
contours of coverage at any given SNR threshold thro ugh predictive modeling [31]. 
 
When sharing is instead based on cooperation, the p rimary and secondary systems 
interact.  For example, a secondary device may ask the primary for permission to use 
spectrum before transmitting.  This exchange provid es an opportunity for the primary to 
guarantee quality of service for the secondary, whi ch is an important advantage of 
cooperation over coexistence for the secondary devi ce.  This is also an opportunity for 
the license-holder to demand payment, which is an a dvantage of cooperation for the 
primary spectrum-user.  If payment is demanded, thi s is a form of secondary spectrum 
market, but one that operates in real time [32].  T here has been discussion about creating 
a secondary market where these blocks of spectrum c an be “rented” out for months or 
years [33].  It is important to note that more dyna mic forms of sharing, where spectrum is 
given out for minutes or milliseconds, are also pos sible, and in some countries, legal [34].  
An important variation on this model is that of band manager [5, 34].  The regulation is 
similar; one entity is given a license to control a  block of spectrum, and the rights to grant 
temporary access for a fee through a secondary mark et.  Again, access might be allowed 
for a short period, as in [35], or for a very long period.  The difference in models is that 
unlike the cellular provider discussed above, the b and manager has no need for spectrum 
other than to rent it out.   
 
Whether the primary has its own need for spectrum o r not, access to spectrum 
may be granted for free, for a fixed fee, or throug h some form of auction.  Auctions 
allocate resources to those who value those resourc es the most, which is one reason many 
countries now assign long-term spectrum licenses th rough auctions [14].  It has been 
suggested that a policy that allows a real-time auc tion for spectrum could yield similar 
benefits [36], and many papers have been written re cently to address related technical 
issues.  Indeed, sufficiently dynamic real-time auc tions can play a role similar to 
technical congestion control mechanisms, and under some circumstances, are almost (but 
not quite) as effective at relieving congestion [37 ].  While there are certainly benefits to 
auctions, there are greater challenges when auction s are used for real-time allocation, 
especially if one is auctioning the right to transm it for a small time period or a small 
geographic area.  First, auctions are effective whe n multiple parties want the same thing, Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  10 and granting access to one bidder means denying acc ess to the others.  Unless all devices 
are collocated, this is not necessarily the case wi th spectrum, and this greatly complicates 
the problem.  Second, multiple parties can bid in a n auction when their need for spectrum 
occurs at the same time, but not when requests for spectrum are sporadic and 
unsynchronized, as might be the case.  Finally, in contrast to a simple commons model, 
auctions require an auctioneer, and associated infr astructure [15].  The problem gets 
easier if one increases the granularity of the spec trum being auctioned in both time and 
geographic area, but this comes at the cost of spec tral inefficiency. 
 
A cooperative model is also useful for systems that  need guaranteed quality of 
service, but use the spectrum infrequently.  For ex ample, an infrastructure built 
exclusively for public safety agencies (e.g. firefi ghters, police, providers of emergency 
medical services) might be given primary rights to a block of spectrum.  This spectrum 
could be used the vast majority of the time by comm ercial service providers, but they 
would only be granted interruptible access to this spectrum, so public safety agencies 
have ample spectrum during major emergencies [38].   
 
The US Federal Communications Commission recently a dopted a sharing policy 
that takes advantage of these characteristics, alth ough it is the sharing of infrastructure 
and spectrum rather than the sharing of spectrum al one that is the focus [39].  Under this 
FCC plan, it is envisioned that a commercial licens e-holder and a public safety 
organization would each be allocated adjacent spect rum bands nationwide.  The 
commercial provider would build out a common broadb and infrastructure, such that both 
the spectrum and the infrastructure will be used by  both public safety agencies and the 
general public.  In the initial auction, no commerc ial company was interested in making a 
bid beyond the required minimum.  It remains to be seen what will happen in this band. 
 
As with primary-secondary coexistence, the practica lity of the cooperative 
approach depends on the applications involved, and other factors.  For example, the 
primary system needs devices throughout the service  area that can provide admission 
control and possibly toll collection, which is much  easier when the primary system is a 
cellular system rather than a broadcaster.  Indeed,  this approach may someday prove 
commercially attractive to cellular carriers.   We have analyzed scenarios where 
extensive communications among secondaries is possi ble with little impact on the 
primary, for a case where the primary license-holde r is a commercial cellular system [32].  
Effective spectrum-sharing was facilitated by a var iety of technologies, including 
location technology which was used to enhance frequ ency reuse, and secure 
micropayment technology so that primary systems can  receive payments from previously 
unknown secondary devices [40].   
 
C.  Sharing Among Equal Secondaries Devices 
 
It is sometimes assumed that secondary devices must  be unlicensed.  Actually, 
like primary users of spectrum, secondary users can  be licensed or unlicensed. Both 
licensed and unlicensed secondaries are prohibited from causing harmful interference to Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  11 the primary.  One difference is that a licensed sec ondary system need not worry about 
interference from other secondaries.  Thus, quality  of service can be guaranteed for the 
secondary when (and only when) activities of the pr imary do not get in the way.  
Moreover, because there is only one entity causing interference to the primary, it may be 
easier to ensure that interference never reaches a level that would be harmful.  This may 
also make it possible to safely use much higher-pow er secondary devices.  On the other 
hand, if access is unlicensed, many more systems ma y make use of the spectrum.   
 
This policy debate is currently most relevant to th e TV white space.  As discussed 
in Section 3.2, the FCC has tentatively concluded t hat devices may operate in the white 
space, but one of the issues left undecided is whet her those devices should be licensed or 
unlicensed [3].  Should white space be licensed for  use by commercial cellular 
companies?  (With 3-4 TV channels, a carrier could cover the nation [4, 41].)  Or should 
it be unlicensed devices that use cognitive radio, such as the prototypes that Philips and 
Microsoft have recently unveiled [42, 43, 29]?  In the end, the decision may depend on 
what kinds of products and applications are in grea test demand by the public, and views 
on this could easily differ from country to country .   
 
If multiple systems are allowed to operate as secon dary users, they can (as usual) 
coexist or cooperate with each other.  Coexistence is technically simpler in many ways.  
Early successes such as [44, 45] of using cognitive  radio to avoid interference with a 
primary system are coming from devices that determi ne on their own whether it is safe to 
transmit.  Of course, that does not solve the probl em of mutual interference among 
secondary devices, for whom all of the dangers of a  simple commons discussed in 
Section 3.1 remain, including harmful interference,  overconsumption of spectrum due to 
greedy designs, and even the tragedy of the commons .  Clearly, imposing a primary 
system on top of what would otherwise be a commons cannot make the usual problems of 
a commons any easier. 
 
When there is only coexistence between primaries an d secondaries, there are good 
technical reasons to want cooperation among seconda ry devices.  Having more devices 
capable of sensing the primary and exchanging measu rements is a good defense against 
hidden terminals, exposed terminals, and imprecise sensor measurements.  Cooperation 
among secondaries could ensure that multiple device s will not combine to cause 
interference that is harmful to the primary.  Moreo ver, cooperation may allow secondary 
devices to more effectively avoid interfering with each other.  For example, after 
coordinating on a designated signaling channel, fre quency-agile devices might switch to 
bands that are less congested.  Thus, the IEEE 802. 22 standards group [46, 47] and a 
number of researchers (e.g. [48, 43, 49, 50]) have considered cooperative mechanisms for 
secondary devices.   
 
However, the success of some cooperative approaches  may depend on significant 
policy changes.  It is easy to envision cooperation  among homogenous devices in the 
same administrative domain, but will heterogeneous devices with different owners 
cooperate effectively, and will all systems still w ork efficiently and effectively if 
cooperation breaks down?  A technical “solution” th at works only if devices all cooperate, Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  12 without the technical and policy means to ensure co operation, is useless at its best and 
dangerous at its worst; such a system may convince policy-makers to allow something 
that will ultimately lead to harmful interference.  There may be good reasons for 
cooperation even if there is no way to force all de vices to cooperate, but in this case, 
protection against harmful interference must be gua ranteed even in the absence of 
cooperation.  There are policy reforms that can req uire full cooperation of all devices, but 
this comes at a cost, and we must assess whether th ose policy reforms are worthwhile. 
 
As with the cooperative commons discussed in Sectio n 3.1, the problem is 
compounded by the fact that devices may be amply re warded for providing 
misinformation to neighbors [26], perhaps convincin g those neighbors to switch to 
another band by falsely claiming that the primary s ystem is active.  If it is necessary that 
all devices must follow the same cooperative algori thms, then someone must define those 
algorithms, enforce them on all secondary devices d eployed in the band, and handle 
violations.  Once again, voluntary standards will n ot suffice, and this profoundly affects 
which technical designs are viable.  The question o f who is in charge of defining 
algorithms is discussed in Section 4, and challenge s of enforcement are discussed in 
Section 5. 
 
D.  Sharing Among Equal Regional Infrastructures 
 
Another form of spectrum sharing among equals occur s when a handful of 
regional service-providers share spectrum.  Each se rvice-provider is seeking cost-
effective ways to deploy infrastructure and exploit  spectrum resources so as to cover its 
entire service area.  This raises many of the same challenges as the sharing-among-equal 
models discussed in Section 3.1, but because of the  smaller number of players and the 
large investment in wide-area infrastructure, this scenario deserves separate consideration. 
 
As Hatfield and Tenhula have pointed out, one of th e first great success stories for 
dynamic spectrum sharing comes from the land mobile  radio (LMR) systems used for 
public safety [51].  In the US, many thousands of p ublic safety agencies have their own 
communications infrastructure [38], even when cover age areas substantially overlap.  
(This is one reason the number of transmission towe rs used by public safety agencies in a 
US county depends more on the number of municipal g overnments in that county than on 
area or population [52].)  Giving each public safet y agency its own dedicated 
communications channel leads to tremendous spectral  inefficiencies.  To avoid a 
spectrum shortage, trunking  was introduced, whereby LMR systems share channels  
dynamically, either in a centralized or decentraliz ed manner.  The latter can be seen as a 
forerunner of cognitive radio, in that systems dyna mically access spectrum after sensing 
its availability [51].  With trunked LMR, there hav e been relatively few complaints about 
the usual problem with sharing among equals - that some users claim more of the shared 
resource than needed.  Indeed, trunking may have re duced this very problem, since it 
reduced the incentive for public safety agencies to  permanently horde spectrum that they 
do not (yet) need.  Such selfless behavior is encou raging, although there is reason to be 
more hopeful in this scenario than most.  It is alw ays the same small number of public Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  13 safety agencies that share a given spectrum pool, i .e. a “repeated game,” and each public 
safety agency has a genuine interest in the success  of the agencies with whom it shares 
spectrum.    
 
The benefits of sharing are also great for commerci al cellular systems, but the 
incentives are different.  Consider the case where several cellular carriers have collocated 
transmitters to serve the same cell.  At a given ti me, one provider may be at peak capacity, 
and therefore forced to block any additional calls.   Meanwhile, other providers may have 
idle spectrum at that moment that could be used for  the new call.  We have shown that if 
these providers shared spectrum, they could reduce blocking probability for all providers, 
or equivalently, they could achieve the same blocki ng probabilities with much less 
spectrum [53]. Moreover, although it is less obviou s, simulations show that the benefits 
of sharing are as good or better when towers are no t collocated.   So why has this not 
occurred?  The problem is that these carriers would  not have incentive to share spectrum 
in a selfless manner.  Some may simply transmit whe n transmission is unnecessary, to 
deprive their rivals of spectrum.  Even if this can  be avoided, the bigger problem may 
occur in infrastructure deployment.  Any cellular c arrier can improve spectral efficiency 
by deploying more towers and thereby reducing cell size, but this significantly increases 
costs.  A carrier has little incentive to accept th e full burden of this cost when the 
resulting benefits of spectral efficiency are share d with its rivals; if each carrier pursues 
its own self-interest independently, this can lead to poor performance for all [53]. 
 
A combination of technology and spectrum policy ref orm is needed to solve this 
problem   One policy solution is to grant each of t he carriers the presumption of control 
over a portion of the spectrum, and the right to ne gotiate for highly dynamic access to 
each other’s spectrum, as proposed for the Dynamic Radio for IP-Services in Vehicular 
Environments (DRIVE) system [54, 55].  Such negotia tion might allow each carrier 
comparable incursions into the other’s spectrum, or  the carrier making greater use of its 
neighbor’s spectrum might pay for the privilege.  A nother viable policy is to use a variant 
of the band manager described in Section 3.2, where in the band manager would give one 
of several cellular carriers temporary access to a shared band dynamically for a fee [14, 
56, 57].  This approach has commercial promise, and  is already legal in a few countries 
[34].   
 
E.  Sharing Among Equal Regional Infrastructures 
 
 In Section 2, we defined spectrum sharing arrangem ents as sharing among 
equals or primary-secondary sharing, and as based o n cooperation or coexistence, 
yielding four possibilities.  Figure 1 presents exa mples of each of these four 
possibilities (along with the section above which d iscusses the model underlying this 
example in greater detail).  Also, as noted in Sect ion 2, there is sometimes confusion 
between the spectrum-sharing arrangement and the de termination of a set of devices 
as either licensed or unlicensed.  These policy dec isions are certainly related, but it is 
important to separate them.  The more effective cho ice depends in part on the 
applications involved.  To demonstrate this, Figure  2 shows examples of primary-Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  14 secondary sharing we have considered in research wh ere secondaries are licensed, 
and examples where secondaries are unlicensed. 
 
 
 
 Sharing Among Equals Primary-Secondary Sharing 
Coexistence All devices share a block of 
unlicensed spectrum. 
(Section 3.1) 
 
Unlicensed secondary 
devices share spectrum with 
each other when and where 
it is not used by primary 
users. (Section 3.3) 
 
LMR public safety 
communications systems 
share spectrum through 
distributed trunking.  
(Section 3.4) Secondary devices use 
cognitive radio to 
opportunistically share 
spectrum with primary 
spectrum users. (Section 3.2) 
 
Secondary devices use GPS 
and a database of transmitter 
locations to access spectrum 
where primary uses do not 
operate.  (Section 3.2) 
 
Secondary devices use 
ultrawideband technology to 
share spectrum with primary 
users. (Section 3.2) 
Cooperation Unlicensed devices all use 
prescribed common 
protocols and carry each 
other’s traffic in a 
cooperative commons 
managed by a regulator or 
license-holder.  (Section 3.1) 
 
Unlicensed secondary 
devices all communicate and 
cooperate to prevent 
interference to primary 
spectrum users and each 
other. (Section 3.3) 
 
LMR public safety 
communications systems 
share spectrum through 
centralized trunking (Section 
3.4) Secondary devices explicitly 
request permission from a 
license-holder whenever 
they wish to transmit in a 
real-time secondary market.  
(Section 3.2) 
 
An interruptible system has 
exclusive rights to spectrum 
until or unless a primary user 
(such as public safety) 
temporarily preempts this 
system. (Section 3.2) 
 
One cellular carrier 
experiencing excessive call 
volume coordinates with 
another to briefly use the 
latter’s spectrum for a fee.  
(Section 3.4) 
 
Figure 1:  Examples of spectrum-sharing models of e ach type. Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  15  
 
 Secondary is unlicensed Secondary is licensed 
Coexistence between 
primary and secondary           Primary system:  
Licensed TV broadcasters . 
          Secondary systems:  
Opportunistic devices with 
no quality of service 
guarantees            Primary system:  
Licensed TV broadcasters  
          Secondary system:  
Microcellular or cellular 
network which defers to 
primary, but does not share 
with other secondaries.  
Cooperation between 
primary and secondary           Primary system: 
Cellular   
          Secondary systems:  
Devices that get temporary 
quality of service guarantees 
in a real-time secondary 
market            Primary system: 
Public safety   
          Secondary system:  
Cellular network with 
exclusive but interruptible 
access to spectrum  
 
Figure 2:  Examples of licensed and unlicensed seco ndary systems. 
 
IV.  REGULATOR OR LICENSE-HOLDER IN CONTROL 
 
All of the sharing schemes described in Section 3 f ail unless there is some 
entity that establishes the sharing rules.  For exa mple, how much interference are 
secondary devices allowed to impose on the primary system?  Must secondary 
devices cooperate when sensing the primary, and if so, using what mechanisms?  
What etiquette must devices follow in a commons bas ed on coexistence?  Is each 
device required to sense other devices in the band and respond in some way, or is 
there simply a limit on maximum transmit power that  does not depend on activity in 
the band?  Traditional voluntary standards organiza tions have important roles to play, 
but they do not and should not have the authority t o mandate requirements that are 
not voluntary; they were not constructed to be effe ctive for that very different purpose.   
 
Such decisions for a given band will be made either  by the regulator, or by a 
license-holder to whom the regulator has granted su fficient authority.  Traditionally, 
this has been the sole responsibility of the regula tor.  Some countries have now given 
license-holders sufficient latitude in some bands s o that they too could play this role 
[34], but many countries have not.  In return for m anaging the spectrum, the license-
holder might charge a fee to all devices that use t he spectrum.  This could be a one-
time fee when the device is first deployed, or the fee might be usage-based.  
Alternatively, the license-holder might be a manufa cturer that will only allow its own 
devices to operate, thereby ensuring a degree of te chnical homogeneity. 
 
Whether a regulator or license-holder is in charge has a significant impact on 
technology, especially for sharing arrangements tha t require highly detailed technical Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  16 rules of interaction.  Such rules must be changed o ver time as technology evolves.  
Regulatory bodies are designed to make decisions in  a slow and methodical process 
that is transparent to everyone, and to promote com promise among competing 
interests.   Such processes are great at avoiding c orruption and favoritism, but not 
well suited to reacting quickly to exploit a new te chnology, or to repair a newly 
visible interference problem or security vulnerabil ity.  Thus, where a regulator is in 
charge, all else being equal, there are more reason s to select a commons model or a 
primary-secondary sharing model based on coexistenc e. 
 
A band where the license-holder is in charge is mor e conducive to complex 
cooperative approaches where homogeneity is importa nt, such as a commons based 
on cooperation, or primary-secondary sharing based on cooperation. For example, a 
cellular carrier with a spectrum license that wants  to allow secondary users (for a fee) 
can more easily choose between a coexistence model such as [58] or a cooperation 
model such as [32].  Similarly, the manufacturer of  devices that could constitute the 
building blocks of a cooperative commons may get a nationwide license for its own 
devices, and those it deems compatible.  This may l imit opportunities for competitors, 
but it also reduces the dangers of incompatibility.  
 
Many nations are making the transition from analog to digital television, and 
freeing up prime spectrum in the process.  Perhaps we will see manufacturers or new 
kinds of service providers obtain a license for som e of this spectrum, and move some 
of the more complex spectrum-sharing approaches fro m theory to practice. 
 
Another difference between a regulator and a privat e license-holder is that the 
regulator has the ability to influence all spectrum , rather than just one small block.  
This too has technical implications.  Some technolo gies under consideration are only 
viable if they can be deployed nationwide (or throu ghout multiple nations).  For 
example, mobile consumer devices cannot easily be r estricted to one portion of the 
country where spectrum is available.  A regulator c an more easily clear a spectrum 
band nationwide and ensure consistent rules through out the band.  A private entity 
can also provide consistent rules once it has a nat ionwide license, but getting a 
nationwide license for this purpose may be difficul t without involvement from the 
regulator [59]. 
 
The most obvious difference between the regulator a nd license-holder is in 
objectives; regulators are supposed to make decisio ns to advance the long-term public 
interest, although they may not always succeed, whe reas a private license-holder is 
likely to maximize its own profit.  If the license- holder is the only entity that can 
provide spectrum for certain applications or device s, e.g. there is one and only one 
band where a license-holder has the authority to ac t as band manager or to provide a 
high-power fixed-wireless broadband service, then i t may use its monopoly power in 
ways that harm the public interest, such as imposin g excessive fees on certain 
applications [60].  However, this can be avoided if  the license-holder faces sufficient 
competition, or at least the realistic fear that su fficient competition will emerge if it 
exploits its monopoly position.  In this case, a pr ofit-seeking license-holder will be Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  17 rewarded for granting access to as many potential s pectrum users (customers) as 
possible, and meeting their technical requirements to the maximum extent possible.  
Thus, the license-holder should act to improve spec tral efficiency wherever possible, 
at least over the time horizons considered by profi t-seeking companies, which 
unfortunately may be shorter than the time horizons  considered by regulators [14]. 
 
 
V.  POLICY ENFORCEMENT 
 
Emerging technology is making enforcement of spectr um policy more and 
more challenging.  Any technology that assumes comp liance with an unenforceable 
policy will never be viable.  Thus, it may be neces sary to alter designs to ensure that 
devices will comply with established rules and to d emonstrate that compliance to 
regulators, even when doing so increases the comple xity and cost of devices. 
 
A number of the sharing models discussed in Section  3 involve unlicensed 
devices.  After deployment, it is technically diffi cult to determine when some 
unlicensed device is violating the rules of the ban d in which it operates, and even 
more difficult to determine which is the offending device.  Consequently, policies are 
enforced primarily be preventing the deployment of devices that are capable of 
violating these rules rather than detecting and pun ishing violators afterwards.  To do 
this, regulators test and approve products before t hey can be widely distributed. 
 
The technology behind software radios and some soft ware-defined radios greatly 
complicates the problem of ensuring a priori that a  device will not cause harmful 
interference to its neighbors.  Although such conce rns are further in the future, 
nanotechnology has the potential to create a simila r challenge.  The problem is that after a 
device has been certified as safe, its functionalit y can be changed with relative ease.  A 
promising approach to address this problem is to cr eate a limiter  in hardware (e.g. [61]) 
or in the operating system (e.g. [62]) that cannot be altered simply by downloading new 
software.  The regulator can then authorize a produ ct based on the effectiveness of its 
limiter with little concern about the rest of the d evice.  One can even make a limiter that 
imposes different policies depending on current loc ation and frequency band.  Moreover, 
it is possible to accommodate policies that change over time by requiring that the limiter 
be updated periodically [63].  If the limiter has n ot been updated sufficiently recently, it 
must prevent all transmissions until it can be upda ted. 
 
The technology behind cognitive radios creates anot her set of complications, 
even for cognitive radios developed entirely in har dware.  The more a device alters its 
behavior in accordance with what it senses from nei ghboring devices, or its current 
location, or other dynamic factors, the harder it i s to exhaustively test that behavior.  
Thus, the risk of undetected faults is greater.  De vices designed for a cooperative 
model will also be hard to test.  For example, cons ider the possibility of secondary 
devices that cooperatively sense whether the primar y system is using the spectrum.  
How can the regulator or license-holder be sure tha t the devices cannot cause harmful Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  18 interference if these devices fully cooperate?    H ow can one be sure that such devices 
will fully cooperate?   
 
It will be incumbent on the creators of novel syste ms that share spectrum to 
find innovative ways to make testing simple for the  regulator or license-holder that 
must grant permission before a new device can use a  given spectrum band.   (Of 
course, this problem is easier if the designer of t he device is also the entity that must 
give permission, i.e. the license-holder.) 
 
The choice of sharing model and licensing regime al so have indirect 
implications for enforcement.  A licensed device wi th exclusive or primary rights to a 
block of spectrum has greater incentive to take act ion when neighboring devices 
violate spectrum policies than a device that shares  spectrum with peers.  With sharing 
among equals, the benefits of such action fall to e veryone who is using the band 
appropriately, but none may want to assume the enti re burden of reporting violations.  
This also demonstrates that this burden should be k ept as small as possible. 
 
 
VI.  CONCLUSION 
 
Scarcity of available spectrum is limiting the grow th of wireless products and 
services.  This scarcity comes largely from our use  of outdated spectrum policies and 
wireless technologies.  Traditional spectrum licens ing prevents harmful interference at 
the cost of spectral efficiency.  Unlicensed bands for low-power devices allow more 
sharing, but often rely on low utilization to limit  the effects of mutual interference.  New 
technology could make more forms of spectrum sharin g practical, thereby substantially 
alleviating today’s spectrum scarcity, if and only if spectrum policy is reformed to match 
the technology.  Conversely, new technology should be developed in part to address 
policy concerns if it is to have any impact. 
 
Overly simplistic spectrum policy debates sometimes  pit the perspective of 
operators of wide-area wireless systems (e.g. telev ision, radio, commercial cellular, or 
public safety LMR) against the perspective of desig ners of localized wireless devices (e.g. 
local-area networks, point-to-point links, cordless  phones).  In an ideal (and dangerously 
unrealistic) world, the latter would like to deploy  any technology they choose with 
minimal constraints.  Thus, they generally prefer g etting access to spectrum directly from 
a regulator (who charges no fees and imposes few co nstraints) rather than a license-
holder.  They envision either a completely unconges ted unlicensed band where their 
device is primary, or a primary-secondary arrangeme nt where their secondary device 
must contend with the primary system but no other s econdary devices.  However, the 
ability to deploy any technology you want comes wit h either the necessity to coexist with 
any technology others choose to deploy, or a mandat e from the regulator that everyone 
will use your chosen technology, either of which te nds to destroy the impracticable allure 
of the vision.  There is also the problem that unco ngested bands with easy entry can grow 
congested over time, especially if devices have inc entive to adopt greedy designs.  Thus, Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  19 it is not surprising to see an interest group fight  for easy access to a block of spectrum 
initially, and then later fight to keep newcomers o ut. 
 
On the other side, wide-area service providers enjo y the quality of service 
guarantees that come from being a primary license-h older.  They would prefer to have 
unlimited flexibility within the bands they use, an d no danger of interference.  They have 
little interest in the creation of commons, and if secondary devices are allowed at all, they 
believe the owners of those devices should explicit ly negotiate for access with the 
license-holder rather than the regulator.  This arr angement works well for some 
applications, and poorly for others.  (It is unwork able in TV white spaces, since by 
definition, there is no license-holder to grant acc ess in the white space.)  Moreover, this 
approach may fail to exploit cognitive radio’s abil ity to make use of spectrum that would 
otherwise sit idle.   
 
A much wider range of policies and sharing arrangem ents are possible, and 
deserve serious consideration.  It is pointless to look for the “best” form of sharing, as 
this is highly dependent on the types of applicatio ns involved.  Thus, we should hope that 
different forms of sharing will emerge in different  bands.  Nevertheless, within a given 
band, adoption of one form of sharing often preclud es other forms.  Given that 
opportunities to redefine the policies of a given b and occur infrequently, policy-makers 
must make difficult decisions.   
 
This paper has argued that most sharing arrangement s can be well described and 
categorized as based on coexistence  or cooperation , and as sharing among equals  or 
primary-secondary sharing .  Within a given band, there may be multiple shari ng 
arrangements of different kinds.  For example, ther e may be primary and secondary 
systems that merely coexist with each other, while the secondary systems cooperate 
amongst themselves.  For primary-secondary sharing,  we must seek technical assurance 
that the primary system will never experience harmf ul interference, despite inevitable 
uncertainties over path loss, and hidden terminals.   For sharing among equals, we must 
address whether technology gives designers and user s the means to avoid serious 
interference and congestion problems, and whether p olicy combined with technology 
give them the motivation to do so. 
 
Many factors must be considered when deciding to ad opt a particular spectrum-
sharing arrangement, including potential gains in s pectral efficiency, and the ability to 
meet the needs of the most likely applications with  respect to interference protection, 
congestion, support for mobility, and more.  A less  obvious factor that might preclude use 
of an otherwise attractive technology is the abilit y to ensure that spectrum policies can be 
enforced.  It is therefore incumbent on developers of novel technology, especially 
software radio and cognitive radio, to include feat ures that facilitate conclusive testing.  
 
The importance of cognitive radio depends somewhat on which policies prevail, 
and conversely, the pace at which cognitive radio d evelops may influence policy 
decisions.  Cognitive radio is already seen as a va luable tool for primary-secondary 
sharing based on coexistence.  It may also be a val uable tool for sharing among equals Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  20 based on coexistence, e.g. a coexistent commons, if  policies are adopted that would 
motivate use of cognitive radio.  Where sharing is based on cooperation, cognitive radio 
may or may not have as large a role to play. 
 
In many countries, the transition to digital televi sion will make prime spectrum 
available for other purposes, potentially under a n ovel spectrum policy that allows new 
forms of sharing.  There may even be the possibilit y of spectrum bands where private 
license-holders set the rules rather than regulator s.  For example, a new band manager or 
a consortium of wireless device manufacturers could  obtain a license, which might 
facilitate use of more complex rules of interaction .   
 
 
VII.  REFERENCES 
 
[1] US Federal Communications Commission Spectrum P olicy Task Force, Report of the 
Spectrum Efficiency Working Group , Nov. 2002, 
www.fcc.gov/sptf/files/SEWGFinalReport_1.pdf  
[2] J. Mitola and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio: Making Software Radios More Personal,” 
IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 13-18, Aug. 1999. 
[3] US Federal Communications Commission, FCC 06-15 6, First Report and Order, In the 
Matter of Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands, ET Docket No. 04-186, Oct. 18, 2006. 
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/F CC-06-156A1.pdf   
[4] J. M. Peha, “The Debate Over TV 'White Space' S pectrum,” (slides), IEEE International 
Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Net works and Communications 
(Crowncom),  July 2007.  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[5] J. M. Peha, “Approaches to Spectrum Sharing,” IEEE Communications , Vol. 43, No. 2, 
Feb. 2005 .  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html  
[6] J. M. Peha, "Emerging Technology and Spectrum P olicy Reform," Proceedings of United 
Nations International Telecommunication Union (ITU)  Workshop on Market Mechanisms 
for Spectrum Management , Geneva, Switzerland, Jan. 2007. 
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/policy.html   
[7] US Federal Communications Commission, Spectrum Policy Task Force  Report, ET Docket 
No . 02-135, Nov. 2002, www.fcc.gov/sptf/reports.html   
[8] P. J. Kolodzy, “Dynamic Spectrum Policies: Prom ises and Challenges,” Digital Migration 
Symposium , Jan. 2004. 
[9] S. Haykin, “Cognitive Radio: Brain-Empowered Wi reless Communications,” IEEE Journal  
on  Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 201-220, Feb. 2005. 
[10] D. Raychaudhuri and J. Xiangpeng  , “ A Spectrum Etiquette Protocol For Efficient 
Coordination Of Radio Devices In Unlicensed Bands,”  Proc. IEEE Personal Indoor Mobile 
Radio Conference , Sept. 2003 , pp. 172-6. 
[11] A. Tonmukayakul and M. Weiss, “A Transaction C ost Analysis of Secondary vs. 
Unlicensed Spectrum Use” Proc. 34th Telecommunications Policy Research Confe rence 
(TPRC), Sept. 2006.  www.tprc.org  Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  21 [12] US Federal Communications Commission, Spectrum  Policy Task Force, Report of the 
Unlicensed Devices and Experimental Licenses Workin g Group, Nov. 2002.  
http://www.fcc.gov/sptf/files/E&UWGFinalReport.pdf  
[13] US Federal Communications Commission, Public No tice DA-07-4605, Wireless 
Telecommunications Bureau Announces Start Date for L icensing and Registration Process 
for the 3650-3700 MHz Band , Nov. 14, 2007. 
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/D A-07-4605A1.pdf   
[14]  J. M. Peha, “Spectrum Management Policy Optio ns ,” IEEE Communications Surveys , 
Fourth Quarter 1998, www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[15]  D. P. Satapathy and J. M. Peha, ”Spectrum Sha ring Without Licensing:  Opportunities and 
Dangers,” in Interconnection and the Internet:  Selected Papers From the 1996 
Telecommunications Policy Research Conference , G. L. Rosston and D. Waterman editors, 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 1997, pp. 49-75,  
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[16] J. M. Peha, "Unrestricted Permits for Ultrawid eband Devices," comments on the Federal 
Communications Commission's Rules Regarding Ultrawi deband Transmission Systems, 
FCC Docket 98-153, June 30, 2000.  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[17] G. Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science, Vol. 168, No. 3859, pp. 1243-8, Dec. 
1968. 
 [18] D. P. Satapathy and J. M. Peha, "Performance of Unlicensed Devices with a Spectrum 
Etiquette," Proceedings of IEEE Globecom,  Nov. 1997 pp. 414-8. 
[19] D. P. Satapathy and J. M. Peha, “A Novel Co-exi stence Algorithm for Unlicensed Variable 
Power Devices,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communicatio ns (ICC), June 
2001, pp. 2845-9, www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[20] D. P. Satapathy and J. M. Peha, “Etiquette Mod ifications For Unlicensed Spectrum: 
Approach and Impact,” Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference  (VTC-98), 
May 1998, pp. 272-6. 
[21] D. Reed, “Comments for FCC Spectrum Task Force  on Spectrum Policy,” July 10, 2002, 
www.reed.com/OpenSpectrum/FCC02-135Reed.html  
[22] Y. Benkler, “Overcoming Agoraphobia: Building the Commons of the Digitally Networked 
Environment ,” Harvard J. Law & Tech , Winter 1997-8. 
[23] A. Agarwal and P. R. Kumar, ``Capacity bounds for ad-hoc and hybrid wireless networks.'' 
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communications Review, pp. 71- 81, Vol. 34, No. 3, July 
2004. 
[24] F. X. Plarre and P. R. Kumar, "Scaling Laws fo r Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: An 
Information Theoretic Approach," NOW Publishers, Del ft, The Netherlands, 2006. 
http://black.csl.uiuc.edu/~prkumar/ps_files/06-07-1 8-scaling-laws.pdf  
[25] J. M. Peha, B. E. Gilden, R. J. Savage, S. She ng, B. L. Yankiver, "Finding an Effective 
Sustainable Model for a Wireless Metropolitan-Area Network: Analyzing the Case of 
Pittsburgh," Proc. 35th Telecommunications Policy Research Confe rence (TPRC) , Sept. 
2007.  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[26] H. J. Kim and J. M. Peha, “Detecting Selfish B ehavior in a Cooperative Commons,” 
Proceedings of IEEE Dyspan, Oct. 2008.  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
[27]  US Federal Communications Commission, First Report and Order , Revision of Part 15 of 
the Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra-Wideband Tra nsmission Systems, ET Docket 98-Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  22 153, February 14, 2002, http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/F CC-02-
48A1.pdf   
[28] Y. Zhao, J H Reed, S Mao, K K Bae, “Overhead A nalysis for REM-Enabled CR 
Networks,” Proc IEEE Workshop on Networking Technolog ies for Software Defined 
Radios, Sept 2006. 
[29] US Federal Communications Commission, Office o f Engineering and Technology, Initial 
Evaluation of the Performance of Prototype TV-Band White Space Devices , Report 
FCC/OET 07-TR-1006, July 31, 2007. 
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/D OC-275666A1.pdf   
[30] R. P. Margie, “Efficiency, Predictability, and  the Need for an Improved Interference 
Standard at the FCC,” Proc. 31 st  Telecommunications Policy Research Conference (TPR C), 
Sept. 2003.  www.tprc.org   
[31] D. N. Hatfield and P. J. Weiser, Property Righ ts in Spectrum: Taking the Next Step, 
Proceedings of  IEEE Dyspan , Nov.  2005, pp. 43-55.  
[32] J. M. Peha, S. Panichpapiboon, “Real-Time Seco ndary Markets for Spectrum,” 
Telecommunications Policy,  Vol. 28, No. 7-8, pp. 603-18, Aug. 2004, 
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html  
[33] US Federal Communications Commission, Promotin g Efficient Use of Spectrum Through 
Elimination of Barriers to the Development of Secon dary Markets, Report And Order And 
Further Notice Of Proposed Rulemaking, WT Docket No. 00-230, Oct 2003.  
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/F CC-03-113A1.pdf  
[34] US Federal Communications Commission, Promotin g Efficient Use of Spectrum Through 
Elimination of Barriers to the Development of Secon dary Markets, Second Report And 
Order, WT Docket No. 00-230, Sept.2004.  
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/F CC-04-167A1.PDF  
[35] V. Brik, E. Rozner, S.  Banerjee, , and P. Bah l, “DSAP: a Protocol for Coordinated 
Spectrum Access,” Proceedings of  IEEE Dyspan , Nov.  2005, pp. 611-4. 
[36] E. M. Noam, “Taking the Next Step Beyond Spectru m Auctions:  Open Spectrum Access,”  
IEEE Communications, Vol. 33, No. 12, pp. 66-73, Dec. 1995. 
[37] J. M. Peha, "Dynamic Pricing as Congestion Con trol in ATM Networks," Proceedings of 
IEEE Globecom , pp. 1367-72 , Nov. 1997. www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/pricing.html   
[38] J. M. Peha, "Fundamental Reform in Public Safe ty Communications Policy," Federal 
Communications Bar Journal , Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 517-45, June 2007 , 
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/safety.html   
[39] US Federal Communications Commission, Second R eport and Order, in the Matter of 
Service Rules for the 698-746, 747-762 and 777-792 MHz Bands, WT Docket No. 06-150, 
August 10, 2007.   http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/F CC-07-132A1.pdf   
[40] J. M. Peha and I. M. Khamitov, "PayCash: A Sec ure Efficient Internet Payment System," 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications Journ al, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 381-8, Winter 
2004. www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/ecommerce.html   
[41] C. L. Jackson and D. Robyn, “Encouraging Broad band Internet Access 
in the TV White Space: The Licensed Option,” Proc. 35th Telecommunications Policy 
Research Conference (TPRC) , Sept. 2007.  www.tprc.org  
[42] C. Cordeiro, K. Challapali, “C-MAC: A Cognitiv e MAC Protocol for Multi-Channel 
Wireless Networks,” Proc .IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 147-57. Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  23 [43] Y. Yuan, P. Bahl, R. Chandra, P. A. Chou, J. I . Ferrell, T. Moscibroda, S. Narlanka, Y. Wu, 
“KNOWS: Cognitive Radio Networks Over White Spaces,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 
2007, pp. 416-27. 
[44] F. W. Seelig, “A Description of the August 200 6 XG Demonstrations at Fort A.P. 
Hill,” Proc/ IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 1-12. 
[45] P. Tenhula, F. Perich, and M. McHenry, “Policy -Based Spectrum Access Control 
and Management for Multi-Band Cognitive Radio Syste ms for Public Safety 
Communications,” Proc. 35th Telecommunications Policy Research Confe rence 
(TPRC) , Sept. 2007.  www.tprc.org  
[46] IEEE 802.22 Working group, http://www.ieee802.org/22  
[47] C Cordeiro, K. Challapali, D. Birru, and N. S. Shankar, “IEEE 802.22: The First 
Worldwide Wireless Standard Based On Cognitive Radi os,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , Nov.  
2005, pp. 328-337. 
[48] S. M. Mishra, A. Sahai, and R. W. Brodersen, “ Cooperative Sensing among Cognitive 
Radios,” Proc. IEEE International Conference  on Communications , June 2006, pp. 1658-
63 .  
 [49] M. Sharma, A. Sahoo, and K. D. Nayak, “Channel  Selection Under Interference 
Temperature Model in Multi-Hop Cognitive Mesh Networ ks,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 
2007, pp. 133-6. 
[50] X. Liu and Z. Ding, “ESCAPE: A Channel Evacuat ion Protocol for Spectrum-Agile 
Networks,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 292-302. 
[51] D. N. Hatfield and P. A. Tenhula, “The Potenti al Value of Decentralized Trunking as 
Regulatory Precedent for the Introduction of Dynami c Spectrum Access Technology,” 
Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 597-605. 
 [52] J. M. Peha, "How America's Fragmented Approac h to Public Safety Wastes Spectrum and 
Funding," Proc. 33rd Telecommunications Policy Research Conference (TPRC) , Sept. 
2005.  www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/safety.html  
[53] H. Salgado, M. A. Sirbu, and J. M. Peha, "A Nar row Band Approach to Efficient PCS 
Spectrum Sharing Through Decentralized DCA Access P olicies," IEEE Personal 
Communications,  Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 24-34, Feb. 1997.  
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/wireless.html   
 [54] L. Xu, R. Tonjes, T. Paila, W. Hansmann, M. F rank, and M. Albrecht, "DRiVE-ing to the 
Internet: Dynamic Radio for IP Services in Vehicula r Environments,” Proc. IEEE 
Conference on Local Computer Networks , Nov. 2000.  http://www.ist-
drive.org/papers/Lcn2000/LCN2000.pdf   
[55] Dynamic Radio for IP-Services in Vehicular Env ironments Project, www.ist-drive.org 
[56] M. M. Buddhikot, P. Kolodzy, S. Miller, K. Rya n, and J. Evans, “DIMSUMnet: new 
Directions In Wireless Networking Using Coordinated  Dynamic Spectrum,”  Proc. IEEE 
Symposium on World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedi a Networks , pp. 78-85, June 2005. 
[57] A. P. Subramanian, H.  Gupta, S. R.  Das, M. M .  Buddhikot, “Fast Spectrum Allocation in 
Coordinated Dynamic Spectrum Access Based Cellular Networks,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , 
April 2007, pp. 320-330. 
 [58] H. R. Karimi, L. T. W. Ho, H. Claussen, L. G.  Samuel, “Evolution Towards Dynamic 
Spectrum Sharing in Mobile Communications,”  Proc. IEEE Personal Indoor Mobile Radio 
Conference , Sept. 2006 , pp. 1-5. Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 708-19, April 2009.  
  24 [59] M. A. Heller, “The Tragedy of the Anticommons:  Property in the Transition from Marx to 
Markets,” Harvard Law Review , Vol. 111, No. 3, pp. 621-88, Jan., 1998. 
[60] J. M. Peha, "The Benefits and Risks of Mandati ng Network Neutrality, and the Quest for a 
Balanced Policy," International Journal of Communication , pp. 709-16, 2007.  
www.ece.cmu.edu/~peha/policy.html   
[61] N. Jesuale and B. C. Eydt, “A Policy Proposal t o Enable Cognitive Radio for Public Safety 
and Industry in the Land Mobile Radio Bands,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 66-77. 
[62] F. Perich, “Policy-Based Network Management for  NeXt Generation Spectrum Access 
Control,” Proc. IEEE Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 496-506. 
[63] J. Chapin and W. H. Lehr, “Time-Limited Leases  for Innovative Radios,” Proc. IEEE 
Dyspan , April 2007, pp. 606-19. 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
Jon M. Peha received the B.Sc. degree from Brown Un iversity, Providence, RI, and the Ph.D. 
degree in electrical engineering from Stanford Univ ersity, Stanford, CA. He is Chief 
Technologist of the U.S. Federal Communications Com mission and a full Professor in the 
Department of Engineering and Public Policy and the  Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Carnegie–Mellon University, Pittsburgh , PA, where he has served as Associate 
Director of the university’s Center for Wireless an d Broadband Networking. He has been Chief 
Technical Officer of three high-tech startups and a  member of Technical Staff with SRI 
International, AT&T Bell Laboratories, and Microsof t. He has also addressed telecom and e-
commerce issues on legislative staff in the U.S. Co ngress and helped launch a U.S. government 
interagency program to assist developing countries with information infrastructure. He consults 
for industry and government agencies around the wor ld. His research spans technical and policy 
issues of communications networks, including spectr um management, broadband Internet, 
wireless networks, video and voice over IP, communi cations for emergency responders, 
universal service, secure Internet payment systems,  dissemination of copyrighted material, e-
commerce, and network security.  He is an IEEE Fellow and an AAAS Fellow. 