The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating
Federal Spectrum for 5G
Photo: Peter Heckmeier/Adobe Stock
Report by Clete Johnson
Published July 14, 2023
 Available Downloads
Download the Full Report 86kb
The United States faces a large and growing gap with China in radio frequency
spectrum allocated for 5G wireless communications, particularly mid-band spectrum3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 1/11bands licensed for wide-area coverage, which constitute the primary arteries of the 5G
economy and the broader global ecosystem of wireless connectivity. This gap
threatens core U.S. national security interests, and China’s spectrum strategy is
deliberately seeking to exploit it in order to advance its own interests. To address this
licensed spectrum shortage as technology advances and industry develops more
products and services that rely on spectrum, the United States needs to move urgently
to allocate more mid-band spectrum for licensed commercial 5G use. If it does not do
so, the U.S. spectrum shortage will hinder technological innovation and give China an
open path to global leadership in the connected future of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
threatening the economic and national security of the United States. 
Providing more licensed mid-band spectrum for 5G will require a carefully
coordinated eﬀort to develop eﬀective coexistence mechanisms or potentially relocate
certain users of this spectrum, which provides ideal characteristics for 5G
deployment. The U.S. government and industry have successfully undertaken this
challenge before. Reallocating or otherwise transitioning spectrum for the purpose of
achieving the most eﬀective and eﬃcient use of that spectrum will be indispensable
for U.S. security interests, as the country needs a vibrant technology economy to
counter autocratic governments that seek to undermine free market democratic
governance. Reallocation requires careful and intentional coordination between
government and industry to ensure that incumbent users have the resources they
need for continued operation of critical government systems, and that new users have
the certainty necessary to invest in new products and services that rely on their new
licensed spectrum rights. Reallocation requires coherent government processes and a
carefully planned transition with industry, and experience has shown that this is
possible.
The 5G Spectrum Shortage in the United States Threatens U.S. Security
Interests
The United States is becoming vulnerable as a “spectrum island” by not allocating
suﬃcient mid-band spectrum for 5G. As discussed in the ﬁrst paper in this series, the
allocation of licensed spectrum is a strategic issue that is core to U.S. economic
strength and technological innovation—and also to U.S. security because commercial
strength is the foundation of national security, both in peace and war. The3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 2/11extraordinary scale, capacity, and dynamic technological innovation of the United
States and its allied industrial base have been the country’s greatest strength for over a
century, and it was indispensable to victories in World War II and the Cold War for the
United States and its allies. This will also be the case in the twenty-ﬁrst century, in
which the key strategic security question is whether the United States and its market
democratic allies will set the world’s course, or if China, Russia, and other
authoritarian regimes will predominate.
[T]he United States needs to move urgently to allocate more mid-band spectrum
for licensed commercial 5G use. If it does not do so, the U.S. spectrum shortage
will hinder technological innovation and give China an open path to global
leadership in the connected future of the twenty-ﬁrst century, threatening the
economic and national security of the United States. 
Most of the crucial emerging technologies necessary for sustained U.S. leadership are
being developed by the private sector. Spectrum allocations shape markets
domestically and internationally and aﬀect the pace and scope of innovation of these
technologies. China knows this and is seeking dominance in every key technology
sector in the world; China’s spectrum strategy for 5G is central to its long-term
strategic plans. The ubiquitously connected society driven largely by 5G wireless
broadband will provide connected and autonomous vehicles, connected warehouses
and logistics, and remote sensors in every sector. This connectivity will capture
exponentially more digital data than has ever existed in history, expanding the
capabilities of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), advanced analytics, and cyber capabilities
beyond anything imaginable today. This will be a crucial national security domain for
both autocracies and market democracies in the twenty-ﬁrst century. 
In line with this strategy, China has already allocated a signiﬁcant amount of mid-band
spectrum to commercial 5G. In ﬁve years, China is expected to lead the world, with up
to 1160 megahertz (MHz) of mid-band spectrum available for commercial 5G. Further,
China is aligning with other countries to harmonize their spectrum allocations with its
own. Countries that harmonize spectrum gain larger market shares for equipment3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 3/11designed to use speciﬁc frequencies and beneﬁt from greater and more versatile
performance. China knows this and is acting accordingly. China’s recent international
advocacy leading up to the World Radiocommunications Conference (WRC) indicates
that it will support the harmonization of 1490 MHz of spectrum for potential new 5G
use; the United States is supporting nearly 80 percent less.
This is a potential long-term national security catastrophe. If the United States does
not lead in 5G-enabled innovations, China will—and the repercussions would be dire.
As the United States demonstrated through the advances that resulted from its world-
leading deployment of 4G LTE, countries that invest in the next generation of wireless
communications, including by allocating the necessary spectrum for commercial uses,
will reap strategic advantages from the resulting technological innovations and
economic dynamism. In particular, 5G will dramatically impact industries as wide-
ranging as healthcare, energy, transportation, law enforcement, e-commerce,
logistics, and education.
China’s government recognizes this fact and correctly sees global technological
leadership as a lever of strategic security. Consider the threat to the United States of a
TikTok or Huawei equivalent “national champion” dominating every key sector of the
global economy—including those related to weapons and force projection, such as
quantum computing, AI, and cyber operations. There are no weapons, technology
bans, or mitigation possibilities that could adequately defend U.S. security interests in
such a scenario.
Despite the grave national security implications of China’s potential lead in 5G, the
United States faces an acute shortage of crucial mid-band licensed spectrum, the most
valuable spectrum for 5G. Experts expect that the United States will have a substantial
deﬁcit of 400 MHz by 2027 and 1400 MHz by 2032. China has allocated over 70
percent more licensed mid-band spectrum for 5G than the United States. This mid-
band gap gives China a free competitive advantage in industries that are vital to future
U.S. technology leadership and thus to U.S. security interests. If this spectrum
shortage is not addressed, the United States will cede the future to China, hindering
U.S. innovation in essential industries that use wireless technologies, including
robotics, cloud computing, biotechnologies, and military communications, logistics,
and weapons systems. 3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 4/11Key U.S. allies also are allocating more licensed spectrum for 5G, recognizing that this
is essential to drive large-scale 5G deployments. The United States is hundreds of
megahertz behind countries such as Japan, the United Kingdom, and South Korea in
providing licensed spectrum for 5G. As the next paper in this series will detail, many
U.S. allies currently have commercial 5G operations in the lower 3 gigahertz (GHz)
band, including allies that host U.S. military bases or purchase U.S. defense
equipment systems that operate in that range. In short, there is no reason for the
United States to lag behind China.
Consider the threat to the United States of a TikTok or Huawei equivalent
“national champion” dominating every key sector of the global economy . . .
There are no weapons, technology bans, or mitigation possibilities that could
adequately defend U.S. security interests in such a scenario.
With this drastic spectrum shortage looming, the United States urgently needs to ﬁnd
more spectrum for commercial 5G use. Since government users have been allocated
61 percent of the lower mid-band spectrum (compared to less than 10 percent for
licensed commercial users), it will be necessary to ﬁnd opportunities for coordinated,
full-power licensed use for wide-area coverage—including eﬀective coexistence
mechanisms or, in some cases, relocating federal users to other bands—in order for
the United States to have suﬃcient spectrum to lead the 5G world. To defend and
advance its national security interests, the United States must reallocate spectrum for
commercial use. This strategic security need to address the spectrum shortage is most
acute in licensed commercial spectrum for wide-area deployments that are the
lifeblood of the mobile ecosystem and central to the collective and growing demand
for ubiquitous high-performance networks. 
Reallocation Requires Planning and Coordination—and Provides
Funding to Advance Federal Agency Missions
Eﬀectively reallocating spectrum requires coherent government processes to provide
certainty to new users and an orderly transition to incent and support coexistence or
relocation of incumbent users. Certainty promotes investments, as companies can be3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 5/11conﬁdent that the resources they invest in licensed spectrum will not be wasted due
to changes in the rights to use that spectrum. 
The United States has a history of successfully reallocating spectrum to make more
eﬀective or eﬃcient use of frequency bands. Past reallocations show that all parties
involved beneﬁt when the U.S. government (1) makes discerning decisions to open
spectrum to commercial licensed use, (2) applies proceeds from license auctions to
ﬁnancially support government agencies in the transition, and (3) carefully
coordinates across agencies and pertinent industry stakeholders. U.S. government
agencies beneﬁt from upgraded equipment, companies beneﬁt from expanded access
to spectrum for innovative uses, and the American people beneﬁt from a more
prosperous and innovative economy. This is the well-worn path that is required now
to defend and advance U.S. security interests in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
U.S. law has a tried-and-true statutory vehicle for ensuring that auction proceeds
beneﬁt any federal agencies that must relocate to other spectrum bands or upgrade
their equipment. Nearly two decades ago, Congress passed the Commercial Spectrum
Enhancement Act (CSEA), which created the Spectrum Relocation Fund (SRF), the
mechanism to provide funds for costs associated with agencies relocating to new
bands or adopting new technologies. The SRF is funded by auction revenues and
ensures revenues will support federal agency relocations, with the CSEA requiring
proceeds from any auction to be at least 110 percent of the total estimated relocation
costs. The CSEA also provides certainty for auction winners and a streamlined process
for funding agencies’ relocations, as well as oversight and transparency regarding how
these funds are being used. Previously, auction winners had to negotiate with federal
agencies regarding the costs to relocate and timelines for moving from the auctioned
band. Now, federal agencies need to provide a timeline and estimated costs.
Additionally, pursuant to subsequent amendments to the CSEA, these estimated costs
can include costs for planning, system upgrades, and research and development, and
agencies are paid immediately after an auction. Additionally, these subsequent
amendments provide new mechanisms to fund eﬃciency improvements that allow for
coordinated coexistence in certain spectrum bands rather than full relocation of
incumbents to other bands.3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 6/11History shows that reallocation can work if the federal government leads and
collaborates with commercial stakeholders. The Advanced Wireless Services (AWS-1)
auction in 2006 was an overwhelming success in coordination across 12 federal
agencies, including the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the
Departments of Agriculture, Interior, and Energy. With $13.7 billion in revenue and a
return on investment of over 775 percent, revenues easily exceeded the CSEA
minimum and provided ample funding for agencies to upgrade to digital systems and
IP-based communications systems. The National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (NTIA) and Oﬃce of Management and Budget ensured
that agencies successfully implemented transition plans and addressed unforeseen
challenges. In this particular case, costs for relocation came in at $400 million over
the initial agency estimates, but the SRF was suﬃciently funded to cover those
unexpected agency costs.
In several other relocation experiences, the initial estimates were actually far higher
than the ultimate SRF outlays needed to fund relocation. For instance, in 2014 and
2015, with over $41.3 billion in revenue, the AWS-3 auction brought in a return on
investment of over 700 percent. This auction required relocation and coordination
with 16 federal agencies and more than 100 diﬀerent federal wireless systems.
Through NTIA leadership and collaboration with commercial stakeholders, the
government overcame challenges such as accommodating federal uses of the band
where relocation would have been cost prohibitive or impossible. Further, the costs of
relocation following the AWS-3 auction have been approximately half of NTIA’s
original estimates.
More recently, the Department of Defense agreed to relocate from the 3.45–3.55 GHz
band in 2020 in favor of commercial use to advance the deployment of 5G in the
United States. The result was $21.8 billion for the U.S. government and over 100 MHz
available for auction winners (and the American people) to use. Deployment is early
in the process, and coordination between the private sector and government has
followed similar paths to processes for the AWS bands, with unique considerations for
the novel Cooperative Planning Areas and Periodic Use Areas. In some cases, this may
include coexistence mechanisms that allow certain government systems to remain in
the band based on coordinated sharing arrangements.3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 7/11The AWS and 3.45 GHz models show that collaboration between the private sector
and government can create mutual beneﬁts. Federal agencies, including the
Department of Defense, can maintain and in many cases upgrade or otherwise
advance their vital operations, while commercial providers can build out their 5G
networks nationwide to drive U.S. technological leadership worldwide.
Coherent Government Processes Are Needed for Orderly Reallocation
The United States needs coherent government processes for reallocation to ensure
that spectrum is used to best advance U.S. economic and national security interests. It
is important for the U.S. government’s two spectrum regulators—the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) for commercial spectrum and NTIA for federal
spectrum—to be the ultimate decisionmakers, and NTIA should serve as the central
agency to represent federal government interests. When diﬀerent government
agencies are not on the same page, deployment can be delayed, government and
private resources can be unnecessarily spent, and allocation decisions that impact
U.S. economic and national security can be hindered.
First and most fundamentally, Congress needs to restore the FCC’s spectrum auction
authority, a groundbreaking approach to eﬃcient spectrum allocation that brought
the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences to the economists who developed the concept.
In March of this year, Congress allowed the FCC’s authority to auction spectrum lapse
for the ﬁrst time since the ﬁrst authorization three decades ago. Without this general
authority, the FCC cannot schedule necessary auctions to overcome the U.S. spectrum
shortage. As long as this lapse continues, it creates an impassable roadblock to
catching up to China in allocating valuable 5G spectrum; while the United States lacks
a mechanism to allocate spectrum, China will continue to advance 5G along the
deployment path that its authoritarian government has laid out, with global
technology domination in mind. In the immediate near term, as FCC chairwoman
Jessica Rosenworcel recently noted in congressional testimony, if the U.S. negotiating
team goes to the WRC in October without auction authority, it will undermine U.S.
credibility in negotiations, both for issues on the table this year and also for setting the
agenda for WRC 2027.3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 8/11Second, as the federal government’s halting process in C-band showed, a fragmented
process can cause confusion and delay the deployment of 5G services. The C-band
auction raised record numbers, with wireless providers collectively paying over $80
billion for licenses. However, divides within the federal government—including
approval from the FCC and NTIA but questions about safety issues from the Federal
Aviation Administration—delayed the launch of 5G. The Interdepartment Radio
Advisory Committee (IRAC), composed of representatives from federal agencies with
spectrum interests that help NTIA manage federal use of spectrum, is an essential tool
to develop a coherent and uniﬁed government spectrum policy. The IRAC plays an
important role in advising NTIA of government interests and distributing information
across aﬀected agencies in the context of FCC proceedings on commercial use of
spectrum. These interagency processes are critical to U.S. leadership in 5G. After
years of engagement across the agencies and their regulated industries, wireless
companies are now expected to operate with temporary and minimal restrictions
while the aviation industry addresses its concerns regarding older aircraft equipment.
Still, these delays reinforce the importance of NTIA serving as the voice of the
executive branch in its recommendations to the FCC on commercial spectrum.
Third, stakeholders should work together collaboratively to make spectrum
reallocation work. In a wireless world, spectrum allocations need to have room to take
advantage of technological innovations. Reallocation can be a win-win when
incumbent users are provided the resources to succeed, and new users are provided
the certainty and spectrum necessary for technological innovation and to implement
new uses. The process should not be rigid, as every reallocation, band, and system is
diﬀerent. Reallocation can be guided and organized to beneﬁt all parties, so long as all
parties come to the table transparently and with an eye to mutual beneﬁt and
advancing the interests of the United States, rather than a zero-sum game with distinct
losers and winners.
Commercial Licensed Spectrum for 5G Is Indispensable to U.S. Security
Interests
Will the future consist of freedom and innovation promoted by market democracies
such as the United States and its allies or surveillance and control imposed by
autocratic governments such as China? The U.S. role in advancing commercial3/5/25, 10:36 AM The National Security Beneﬁts of Reallocating Federal Spectrum for 5G
https://www.csis.org/analysis/national-security-beneﬁts-reallocating-federal-spectrum-5g 9/11