Towards a Uniﬁed Cybersecurity Testing Lab for
Satellite, Aerospace, Avionics, Maritime, Drone
(SAAMD) technologies and communications
Andrei Costin, Hannu Turtiainen, Syed Khandker, Timo H ¨am¨al¨ainen
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Jyv ¨askyl ¨a
Finland
fancostin,turthzu,syibkhan,timoh g@jyu.ﬁ
Abstract —Aviation, maritime, and aerospace trafﬁc control,
radar, communication, and software technologies received in-
creasing attention in the research literature over the past decade,
as software-deﬁned radios have enabled practical wireless attacks
on communication links previously thought to be unreachable by
unskilled or low-budget attackers. Moreover, recently it became
apparent that both offensive and defensive cybersecurity has
become a strategically differentiating factor for such technologies
on the war ﬁelds (e.g., Ukraine), affecting both civilian and mil-
itary missions regardless of their involvement. However, attacks
and countermeasures are usually studied in simulated settings,
thus introducing the lack of realism or non-systematic and
highly customized practical setups, thus introducing high costs,
overheads, and less reproducibility. Our “Uniﬁed Cybersecurity
Testing Lab” seeks to close this gap by building a laboratory
that can provide a systematic, affordable, highly-ﬂexible, and
extensible setup.
In this paper, we introduce and motivate our “Uniﬁed Cyber-
security Testing Lab for Satellite, Aerospace, Avionics, Maritime,
Drone (SAAMD)” technologies and communications, as well as
some peer-reviewed results and evaluation of the targeted threat
vectors. We show via referenced peer-reviewed works that the
current modules of the lab were successfully used to realistically
attack and analyze air-trafﬁc control, radar, communication,
and software technologies such as ADS-B, AIS, ACARS, EFB,
EPIRB and COSPAS-SARSAT. We are currently developing and
integrating support for additional technologies (e.g., CCSDS,
FLARM), and we plan future extensions on our own as well
as in collaboration with research and industry. Our “Uniﬁed
Cybersecurity Testing Lab” is open for use, experimentation, and
collaboration with other researchers, contributors and interested
parties.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Aviation, maritime, and aerospace trafﬁc control, radar,
communication, and software technologies received increasing
attention in the research literature over the past decade, as
software-deﬁned radios have enabled practical wireless attacks
on communication links previously thought to be unreachable
by unskilled or low-budget attackers. Critical protocols andimplementations in these domains have been demonstrated
to be either insecure or exploitable under various attacks –
EPIRB and CCSDS (Section IV-A and our other SpaceSec23
submission on “COSPAS-SARSAT/EPIRB” ), ADS-B [1], [2],
AIS [3], [4], ACARS [5], GDL90 [6]. Moreover, recently it
became apparent that both offensive and defensive cybersecu-
rity has become a strategically differentiating factor for such
technologies on the war ﬁelds (e.g., Ukraine), affecting both
civilian and military missions regardless of their involvement.
However, attacks and countermeasures are usually studied in
simulated settings, thus introducing the lack of realism or
non-systematic and highly customized practical setups, thus
introducing high costs, overheads, and less reproducibility.
At the same time, satellite, space and aerospace is strongly
interconnected with aviation, maritime and Search-and-Rescue
(SAR) domains, e.g., satellites processing aviation (ACARS,
ADS-B) and maritime (AIS) data arriving over various com-
munication links. Given this tight interconnect of technologies,
the “additive complexity” may give rise to additional attacks
such as Cross-Channel (XC) as both theorized and demon-
strated by [6], [7], and somewhat equivalent of Cross-Channel
Scripting (XCS) for IoT and web domains [8].
Our “Uniﬁed Cybersecurity Testing Lab” seeks to close
this gap by building a laboratory (with its associated extensible
programmatic platform and testbed devices) that can provide
a systematic, affordable, highly-ﬂexible, and extensible setup.
Consequently, our uniﬁed lab approach allows to experiment
with and test the scenarios that would be otherwise hard or
impossible to test in labs dedicated solely to speciﬁc domains,
e.g., avionics-only, maritime-only, space-only.
A. Contributions
In this paper, we introduce and detail a “Uniﬁed Cyber-
security Testing Lab for Satellite, Aerospace, Avionics, Mar-
itime, Drone (SAAMD)” technologies and communications,
as well as some peer-reviewed results and evaluation of the
targeted threat vectors. We show via referenced peer-reviewed
works that the ﬁrst modules of the lab were successfully
used to realistically attack and analyze trafﬁc control, radar,
communication, and software technologies related to satellites,
space, aerospace, avionics, and maritime systems (e.g., EPIRB,
CCSDS, ADS-B, AIS, ACARS). We are currently developing
and integrating support for additional technology (e.g., dronesAUTHORS’ PREPRINT, DRAFT ACCEPTED BY REVIEWERS of Workshop
on Security of Space and Satellite Systems (SpaceSec)
Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2023
28 February - 4 March 2023, San Diego, CA, USA
ISBN 1-891562-83-5
https://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2023.23xxx
www.ndss-symposium.orgarXiv:2302.08359v1  [cs.CR]  16 Feb 2023– FLARM, RemoteID), and we plan future extensions and
improvements to our lab (e.g., GPS attacks/controls, more so-
phisticated environment control). With this, we aim to convince
that a uniﬁed lab (with strong focus on space and satellite
technologies) is not only beneﬁcial but many times necessary
in order to test complex scenarios as well as to be prepared
for the leading role of space/satellites in years to come.
B. Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss
related studies in Section II. We describe our lab and pentesting
platform in Section III. Then, in Section IV, we describe
different attacking scenarios, their impact on ADS-B, ACARS,
and AIS receivers, and analysis of the results. Finally, we
conclude this paper with Section V.
II. R ELATED WORK
Although avionics and maritime communication has been
the subject of profound research [1]–[3], [6], [9]–[24], the fo-
cus has been mainly on a speciﬁc attack or in theory. Recently
Strohmeier et al. [25] researched building an avionics labo-
ratory for cybersecurity testing. Their approach was testbed
with “certiﬁable realism,” meaning that the equipment must
be capable of in-plane use. They also maintain that the testbed
should be device manufacturer agnostic and in-laboratory
contained. They utilized Garmin GTN 759 ﬂight management
system, Garmin GTX 3000 aircraft transponder, and Garmin
GTS 8000 TCAS collision avoidance systems in their labora-
tory with some auxiliary equipment such as software-deﬁned
radios and Faraday cages. Currently, they support ARINC
429 avionics communication bus, secondary surveillance radar
(SSR), Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-
B), Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), Airborne
Collision Avoidance System (ACAS), and Trafﬁc Alert and
Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) technologies. The au-
thors’ initial tests of their testbed were successful, and the re-
sults were promising. For further research, the authors provided
some guidance in their work. They concluded that constructing
environment “realism” in a laboratory setting has trade-offs
in complexity and cost, affecting the laboratory’s expandabil-
ity and future-prooﬁng. They also received pushback from
avionics manufacturers for collaboration and acquiring the
equipment. In conclusion, Strohmeier et al. [25] built a highly-
capable and effective laboratory setup for trustworthy avionics
cybersecurity testing.
Avionics laboratories can also be particular for thoroughly
testing speciﬁc equipment. For example, they required a so-
phisticated testing suite when South Korea’s defense depart-
ment rolled out their new utility helicopter with a new kind of
Mission Equipment Package (MEP) integrated mission control
system. Kim et al. [26] conducted a requirement assessment
and designed a system integration laboratory to verify the
MEP’s capabilities and functionality before accepting the tech-
nology for active duty. Viana Sanchez and Taylor [27] intro-
duced a Reference Architecture System Testbed for Avionics
(RASTA). Their goal was to deﬁne an architecture for a labo-
ratory that could combine, at the time, the latest agreements of
avionics communication as well as the requirements for end-
to-end spacecraft communication. Dey et al. [28] investigated
drone security vulnerabilities. Their testbed contained two
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
HackRF BladeRF PlutoSDR Avionics 
components  
IQs 
Attack 
payload GNU Radio 
Companion Our flexible security 
assessment platform Attacking devices  Maritime 
components  Satellite/space 
components  
Faraday RF isolation box  Figure 1. Diagram of our lab testing approach.
drones (DJI Phantom 4 Pro and Parrot Bebop 2), a LabSat
GPS simulator, and two mobile phones for hosting the drone-
controlling application. By performing several attacks, such as
deauthentication, GPS spooﬁng, unauthorized ﬁle access, and
others, they concluded that the vulnerabilities in drones could
lead to invasions of privacy, concerns with aircraft safety, and
even personal injury.
Our work relates closest to the recent work of Strohmeier et
al. [25]. Even though our labs have inherent fundamental simi-
larities in their designs, goals, and protocols, there are also sev-
eral unique differentiating features. First, our lab and platform
already cover aerospace (EPIRB, CCSDS) and maritime (AIS),
in addition to the focused aviation/avionics (ADS-S, ACARS)
ﬁeld. Second, our lab, platform, and tests crucially focus
on the attacker’s perspective (e.g., attack vectors, successful
exploitation, new attack techniques) with subsequent defensive
improvements to the affected systems, even though testing
the adherence to functional speciﬁcations and cybersecurity
standards is also within the scope and capabilities of our
lab. Last but not least, our lab aims is ﬁtted to research
offensive and defensive cybersecurity in highly complex end-
to-end scenarios. One example is researching the effect of
ADS-B/AIS attacks when ADS-B/AIS is attacked directly via
an interface on aircraft/ships or via interfaces on satellites
supporting these links. Another example is researching the
effect of attacks when the attacker pivots across protocols
(e.g., ADS-B to CCSDS and vice-versa) or across devices
(e.g., ADS-B transponder of aircraft to satellite RF boards
vice-versa). However, another example is researching the effect
of common IT vulnerabilities (e.g., log4j) in cases when vul-
nerable components are used in aviation, maritime, aerospace
infrastructure, and devices [7].
iiIII. O URTESTING LAB
The main goal of our investigation was to keep the test-
ing scenario close to the realistic one. Therefore, we used
transmission-capable SDRs to generate real-like but fake or
non-standard signals, e.g., for ADS-B, AIS, and ACARS.
We then tested different avionics and maritime devices over
the wireless interface. There was an air gap between the
transmitters and receivers. Fig 1 shows the design of our lab.
We developed a ﬂexible and extensible security assessment
platform that, at present, can create ADS-B 1090ES, UAT978,
and AIS payload according to the protocol speciﬁcations and
attack/test speciﬁcations. We used a signal processing software
called GNU radio companion (GRC) to generate IQs of the
RF signal of the payload. Then the IQs were sunk into the
transmission-capable SDRs to create ADS-B and AIS RF
signals. Even though one type of SDR is enough for the test,
we tested three to check the attacking devices’ availability. The
list of different hardware and software in our laboratory is as
follows.
A. Software
An RF testing laboratory requires much software to be
functional. Our laboratory already employs an extensive soft-
ware suite, and we are constantly adding more. In Table I, we
disclose the software we currently use at the time of writing.
TABLE I. L IST OF DIFFERENT SOFTWARE
Platform Software name Functionality
AviationDump1090 Decoding and displaying 1090ES data
Dump978 Decoding and displaying UAT978 data
RTL1090 Decoding and displaying 1090ES data
PlanePlotter Displaying 1090ES data
Micro ADS-B Displaying 1090ES data
QGround Control Displaying 1090ES data
Mission Planner Displaying 1090ES data
Garmin Pilot Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
ForeFlight Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
Airmate Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
AvPlan Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
Easy VFR4 Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
FlyQ Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
Stratus Insight Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
OZRunways Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
Horizon Displaying 1090ES data
SkyDemon Displaying 1090ES and UAT978 data
ADL Connect Displaying 1090ES data
MaritimeOpenCPN Displaying AIS data
iRegatta Displaying AIS data
Ships Displaying AIS data
Boating Displaying AIS data
iBoating Displaying AIS data
Boat Beacon Displaying AIS data
AF track Displaying AIS data
RTL AIS driver Decoding AIS data
AIS Share Sharing AIS data
ShipPlotter Decoding and displaying AIS data
AISmon Decoding and sharing AIS signal
OthersSDR Sharp Receiving RF signal
GNU Radio Companion Generating IQs
Our Pentesting Platform Generating offensive/non-standard payloads
B. Avionics components
We tested 11 ADS-B receivers, and some had transmitting
capability too. They all support ADS-B 1090ES, four support
dual ADS-B mode, and four support UAT978. Table II shows
our laboratory’s avionics components.
Figure 2 shows the avionics component of our laboratory.TABLE II. L IST OF AVIONICS COMPONENTS IN OUR LABORATORY
Device name Functionality
uAvionix Skyecho2 1090ES and UAT978 receiver. 1090ES transmitter
uAvionix echoUAT 1090ES and UAT978 receiver. UAT978 transmitter
ForeFlight Sentry 1090ES and UAT978 receiver
Garmin GDL 52 1090ES and UAT978 receiver
Aerobits TR-1W 1090ES receiver and transmitter
ADL 180 1090ES receiver
Helios Avionics SensorBox 1090ES receiver
Plane Gadget Radar (PGR) 1090ES receiver
Aerobits EV AL-TT-SF1 1090ES receiver
PX4 1090ES receiver
Cube Orange 1090ES receiver
Figure 2. Aviation/avionics components
C. Maritime components
We tested a commercial transponder, a professional AIS
receiver, and many RTL SDR-based mobile AIS setups in our
laboratory. Table III shows the list.
TABLE III. L IST OF MARITIME COMPONENTS IN OUR LABORATORY
Device name Functionality
Matsutec HP-33A Stand alone AIS transponder
Quark-elec QK-A027 AIS receiver
McMurdo G8 COSPAS-SARSAT AIS/EPIRB transmitter
RTL-SDR RF front-end for AIS mobile applications
Figure 3 shows the maritime component of our laboratory.
D. Satellite and aerospace components
At the time of this writing, we already have in our lab a
space device (Theia Space ESAT), COSPAS-SARSAT devices,
and an aerospace drone device (DJI MATRICE 300 RTK),
as depicted in Figures 4 5. A fast preliminary implementa-
tion already allowed us to discover some Denial-of-Service
vulnerabilities on the satellite device that effectively disables
RF/COMM communication board and requires a hard reboot.
Thanks to our lab and platform, we discovered this is a prob-
lematic scenario for satellites, as availability is a top priority
in the ﬁeld. Immediate future work is to research, develop, and
integrate into our pentesting platform additional and complete
iiiFigure 3. Maritime components
support for software and protocols for these devices and
subsequently thoroughly evaluate their cybersecurity posture
when facing both existing attacks [1], [4], [6], [23], [29] and
perhaps novel ones.
TABLE IV. L IST OF SATELLITE ,SPACE ,AEROSPACE DEVICES
Device name Functionality
Theia Space ESAT a) CCSDS receiver; b) “System security” payloads/boards
DJI Matrice 300 RTK a) ADS-B, FLARM, RemoteID; b) Remote-carrying of “attacking devices” III-E
McMurdo G8 COSPAS-SARSAT EPIRB 406 transmitter
Figure 4. Satellite/aerospace and drone components – Theia Space ESAT and
DJI MATRICE 300 RTK
E. Attacking devices
We used three types of SDRs to transmit the attack/test
signals. All of them supported sending of ADS-B signals.
HackRF and BladeRF support AIS transmission, but the Pluto
SDR’s operating frequency is out of the AIS frequency range.
Table V shows the list of the attacking devices.
Figure 6 shows the attacking and auxiliary devices of our
laboratory.
Figure 5. Satellite/aerospace technology – a COSPAS-SARSAT EPIRB Mc-
Murdo G8 [30]
TABLE V. L IST OF ATTACKING DEVICES
Device name Functionality
HackRF Generating ADS-B, AIS, EPIRB signals using Python/GRC
BladeRF Generating ADS-B, AIS, EPIRB signals using Python/GRC
Pluto SDR Generating ADS-B, EPIRB signals using Python/GRC
Figure 6. Attacking SDRs of our laboratory with auxiliary devices
F . Environment control components
During the development and testing of such labs and
platforms, best practices are advised:
 Whenever possible or applicable, conﬁgure the trans-
mitters (e.g., HackRF) and receivers (e.g., RTL-SDR)
to use the ISM-band, meaning that the transmission
and reception of the signal waves were done on
the central carrier frequency of 433.800 MHz. For
ivexample, in the authors’ geography, the 432–438 MHz
ISM-band is allocated for transceivers exempt from
licensing [31], and it is a good practice to familiarize
with the local/national regulations.
 Whenever possible or applicable, set the lowest trans-
mit power to limit unintended interference in the
unlicensed ISM band.
 In addition, use a certiﬁed “faraday cage” — specif-
ically a Disklabs Faraday Bag — featuring a double
layer military-grade RF faraday shielding, which is
also commonly used for well-contained wireless and
RF testing and forensics (Figure 7).
 Moreover, use a certiﬁed radio power density meter —
speciﬁcally a TriField Model TF2 EMF Meter — to
double-check and ensure that the signals do not escape
the faraday cage/lab premises (Figure 7).
All these precaution measures are complementary and ensure
a well-controlled environment, which is also in line with
commonly accepted practices.
Figure 7. Environment control components – Disklabs Faraday Lab Box LB2
(leak protection), and Triﬁeld EMF Meter Model TF2 (leak detection)
G. Summary and comparison with related work
In Table VI, we present a comparison of the main related
work and our present paper, and below, we introduce the
meaning of symbols used in Table VI.

 : Some of these apply to system/setup: demon-
strated minor early-stage results; implementation is
very early-stage; qualiﬁes for low Technical Readiness
Levels (TRL).

 : Some of these apply to system/setup: demon-
strated some limited results; implementation is partial
or does not cover all use-cases; qualiﬁes for medium
Technical Readiness Levels (TRL).

 : Any (or generally all) of these apply to sys-
tem/setup: generally covers all mentioned use-cases;
has extensible and/or close-to-complete implementa-
tion; demonstrated extensive results; qualiﬁes for high
Technical Readiness Levels (TRL).IV. R ESULTS
We formulated and tested many existing and novel attacks
on ADS-B and AIS with the mentioned setup. Because our
setup supports encoding raw data, besides different attacks,
we also sampled some technical limitations of the receivers,
such as error handling capability. All the experiments have
been conducted within a controlled lab environment, running
at minimal power and shortest duration possible. We brieﬂy
describe the test result below.
A. Experiments on satellite systems
We conducted the following tests on the satellite and
COSPAS-SARSAT EPIRB system:
 Replaying
 Spooﬁng
 Fuzzing
 Denial-of-service (DoS)
On the COSPAS-SARSAT EPIRB implementations, while
we were unable to achieve DoS or crashes (as only very basic
EpirbPlotter software was available as the target receiver at
this point), we have successfully achieved replaying, spooﬁng,
and fuzzing. In Figures 8 9 10, we show successful EPIRB
spooﬁng attacks, wehere we can accurately control virtually
any ﬁeld of the EPIRB messages.
Figure 8. Our spoofed EPIRB-ELT signal (contains ICAO24 aircraft ID) well
received by EpirbPlotter.
On the Theia Space ESAT, all attacks above were imple-
mented successfully on the satellite’s CCSDS implementation.
Moreover, thanks to fuzzing, we discovered speciﬁc pack-
ets and CCSDS sequences that consistently trigger a quasi-
permanent DoS, i.e., the device requires a hard reset in order
for the communication with the device to be possible again.
One main challenge limiting the number of attacks tested
is the highly-limited access to the COSPAS-SARSAT systems
(including software and devices) which itself is due to either
high costs or restricted access (related to the sensitive nature
of such systems). As immediate future work, we aim to estab-
lish national and international contact points with COSPAS-
SARSAT centers to bootstrap cybersecurity readiness testing
and exercises involving presented and future/novel attacks.
vTABLE VI. S UMMARY COMPARISON WITH RELATED STATE OF THE ART“LAB SETUP ”WORKS .
Paper Satellite + Space + Aerospace Aviation Maritime Drones GPS RF shielding
Strohmeier et al. [25]
(SATCOM)
 (ADS-B, TCAS, CPDLC, extensible)NO
(FLARM)
Predescu et al. [32] NO
(ARINC 429, ARINC 664)NO NO NO NO
Dey et al. [28] NO NO NO
 NO
Our current paper
 (CCSDS, COSPAS-SARSAT, EPIRB
extensible + cross-channel (XC))
(ADS-B, EFB, ACARS, EPIRB-ELL
extensible + cross-channel (XC))
(AIS, EPIRB-MMSI
extensible + cross-channel (XC))
(RemoteID, FLARM)NO
Figure 9. Our spoofed EPIRB-PLB signal well received by EpirbPlotter.
Figure 10. Our spoofed EPIRB-MMSI AIS signal (contains MMSI ship ID)
well received by EpirbPlotter.
B. Experiments on avionics system
We have successfully tested the following attacks on the
ADS-B system:
 Aircraft reconnaissance
 Spooﬁng
 Flooding
 Jamming
 False emergency signal
 Aircraft disappearance Trajectory Modiﬁcation
 Logically invalid data encoding
 Fuzzing avionics protocol (GDL-90)
 Denial-of-Service (DoS)
 Attacks on ADS-B CRC error handling
 Highly-Coordinated attackers attack
We implemented and tested these 12 cyberattacks on ADS-
B, of which ﬁve attacks were presented or implemented for
the ﬁrst time. Six portable mobile cockpit information system
(MCIS) devices combined with 21 EFBs, resulting in 44 ADS-
B 1090ES and 24 UAT978 conﬁgurations, were tested for the
DoS attack, which affected approximately 63% and 37% of
1090ES and UAT978 setups, respectively.Moreover, the GDL
90 fuzzing experiment shows a worrying and critical lack of
security in several electronic ﬂight bag (EFB) applications. Out
of 16 tested conﬁgurations, nine (56%) were impacted (crash,
hang, and abnormal behavior).
C. Experiments on maritime system
We conducted the following tests on the AIS system:
 Spooﬁng
 Fake alert “Man OverBoard” (MOB)
 Fake alert “Vessel Collision”
 Jamming
 Overwhelming alerts
 Visual navigation disruption
 Logically invalid data encoding
 Denial-of-Service (DoS)
 Highly-Coordinated attackers attack
 Error handling test
 AIS preamble test
We implemented and tested 11 different tests/attacks on 19
AIS setups. The results showed that approximately 89% of
the setups were affected by DoS attacks. We also identiﬁed an
implementation/speciﬁcation ﬂaw related to the AIS preamble
during the experiments, which may affect the interoperability
of different AIS devices.
viD. Other results and applications
We have also experimented with expanding further ap-
plication horizons of our lab. For example, we have been
successful in using our lab’s pentesting platform and its ﬂexible
capabilities to research, implement and demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of multiple infamous log4j exploits [33] (Remote Code
Execution, Denial of Service) when vulnerable components are
used within aviation (ACARS, ADS-B) and maritime (AIS)
infrastructure.
V. C ONCLUSION
We presented our “Uniﬁed Cybersecurity Testing Lab
for Satellite, Aerospace, Avionics, Maritime, Drone (SAAMD)
technologies and communications” – a cybersecurity-focused,
research-oriented, and industry-capable lab featuring a ﬂexi-
ble pentesting, attack and evaluation platform. The lab aims
at offering extensive and extensible capabilities to perform
complex cybersecurity analyses and tests that are otherwise
challenging to perform in the real world or in similar yet
domain-constrained labs.
In particular, our lab and the vision behind it bridges the
space and satellite technologies with the aviation, maritime,
and drone technologies and protocols, thus allowing new types
and levels of research, experimentation, and innovation to be
performed in a unique and highly uniﬁed manner, both for
cybersecurity and non-cybersecurity purposes.
Last but not least, we invite all interested researchers and
industry practitioners in these domains to elaborate their novel
and experimental ideas to achieve extensive collaborations
and expand the utility of the lab to its maximum potential.
All such comments, requests and queries are welcome at
ancostin@jyu.ﬁ.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Minor sections and some hardware of this research were
kindly supported by the cascade funding from Engage KTN
(SESAR Joint Undertaking under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 783287) project ”Engage - 204 - Proof-of-
concept: practical, ﬂexible, affordable pentesting platform for
ATM/avionics cybersecurity” . All and any results, views, opin-
ions are authors’ only and do not reﬂect the ofﬁcial position
of the European Union (and it’s organizations and projects,
including Horizon 2020 program and Engage KTN). Major
parts of this research were supported by “Decision of the
Research Dean on research funding (20.04.2022)” within the
Faculty of Information Technology of University of Jyv ¨askyl ¨a.
Hannu Turtiainen also thanks the Finnish Cultural Foundation
/ Suomen Kulttuurirahasto (https://skr.ﬁ/en) for supporting his
Ph.D. dissertation work and research (under grant decision
no. 00221059) and the Faculty of Information Technology of
the University of Jyv ¨askyl ¨a (JYU), in particular, Prof. Timo
H¨am¨al¨ainen, for partly supporting and supervising his Ph.D.
work at JYU in 2021–2023. Syed Khandker was partially sup-
ported by the Finnish Foundation for Technology Promotion
under the PoDoCo grant program.REFERENCES
[1] A. Costin and A. Francillon, “Ghost in the Air (Trafﬁc): On insecurity
of ADS-B protocol and practical attacks on ADS-B devices,” Black Hat
USA, pp. 1–12, 2012.
[2] M. Strohmeier, M. Sch ¨afer, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Realities
and challenges of nextgen air trafﬁc management: the case of ADS-B,”
IEEE Communications Magazine , vol. 52, 2014.
[3] M. Balduzzi, A. Pasta, and K. Wilhoit, “A Security Evaluation of AIS
Automated Identiﬁcation System,” in Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference , ser. ACSAC ’14. New
York, USA: ACM, 2014, p. 436–445.
[4] S. Khandker, H. Turtiainen, A. Costin, and T. H ¨am¨al¨ainen, “Cyber-
security Attacks on Software Logic and Error Handling Within AIS
Implementations: A Systematic Testing of Resilience,” IEEE Access ,
vol. 10, pp. 29 493–29 505, 2022.
[5] M. Smith, M. Strohmeier, V . Lenders, , and I. Martinovic, “On the
security and privacy of acars,” Integrated Communications Navigation
and Surveillance (ICNS) , 2016.
[6] H. Turtiainen, S. Khandker, A. Costin, and T. Hamalainen,
“GDL90fuzz: Fuzzing ’GDL-90 Data Interface Speciﬁcation’ Within
Aviation Software and Avionics Devices - A Cybersecurity Pentesting
Perspective,” IEEE Access , 2022.
[7] A. Juvonen, A. Costin, H. Turtiainen, and T. H ¨am¨al¨ainen, “On Apache
Log4j2 Exploitation in Aeronautical, Maritime, and Aerospace Com-
munication,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 86 542–86 557, 2022.
[8] H. Bojinov, E. Bursztein, and D. Boneh, “Xcs: cross channel scripting
and its impact on web applications,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM
conference on Computer and communications security , 2009, pp. 420–
431.
[9] M. Sch ¨afer, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Experimental Analysis of
Attacks on Next-Generation Air Trafﬁc Communication,” in Applied
Cryptography and Network Security . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[10] Z. Wu, T. Shang, and A. Guo, “Security Issues in Automatic Dependent
Surveillance - Broadcast (ADS-B): A Survey,” IEEE Access , vol. 8,
2020.
[11] D. Ko ˇzovi´c and D. Djurdjevic, “Spooﬁng in aviation: Security threats
on GPS and ADS-B systems,” Vojnotehnicki glasnik , vol. 69, 2021.
[12] M. Strohmeier, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “On the Security of the
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Protocol,” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 17, 2015.
[13] M. R. Manesh, M. Mullins, K. Foerster, and N. Kaabouch, “A prelimi-
nary effort toward investigating the impacts of ADS-B message injection
attack,” in IEEE Aerospace Conference . IEEE, 2018.
[14] S. Eskilsson, H. Gustafsson, S. Khan, and A. Gurtov, “Demonstrat-
ing ADS-B AND CPDLC Attacks with Software-Deﬁned Radio,” in
Integrated Communications Navigation and Surveillance Conference
(ICNS) . IEEE, 2020.
[15] D. Lundberg, B. Farinholt, E. Sullivan, R. Mast, S. Checkoway,
S. Savage, A. C. Snoeren, and K. Levchenko, “On the security of
mobile cockpit information systems,” in ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security , 2014.
[16] D. A. Lundberg, “Security of ADS-B Receivers,” Ph.D. dissertation,
UC San Diego, 2014.
[17] D. McCallie, J. Butts, and R. Mills, “Security analysis of the ADS-
B implementation in the next generation air transportation system,”
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection , vol. 4, 2011.
[18] M. R. Manesh and N. Kaabouch, “Analysis of vulnerabilities, at-
tacks, countermeasures and overall risk of the Automatic Dependent
Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system,” International Journal of Crit-
ical Infrastructure Protection , vol. 19, 2017.
[19] D. L. Mccallie, Exploring Potential ADS-B Vulnerabilities in the FAA’s
NextGen Air Transportation System . BiblioScholar, 2012.
[20] M. Strohmeier, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Security of ADS-B:
State of the Art and Beyond,” IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials , vol. 17, 2013.
[21] C. Ray, R. Gallen, C. Iphar, A. Napoli, and A. Bouju, “DeAIS project:
Detection of AIS spooﬁng and resulting risks,” in OCEANS Genova .
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
vii[22] C. Ray, C. Iphar, and A. Napoli, “Methodology for Real-Time Detection
of AIS Falsiﬁcation,” in Maritime Knowledge Discovery and Anomaly
Detection Workshop , 2016, pp. 74–77.
[23] S. Khandker, H. Turtiainen, A. Costin, and T. Hamalainen, “Cyber-
security attacks on software logic and error handling within ADS-B
implementations: Systematic testing of resilience and countermeasures,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , 2021.
[24] E. D’Afﬂisio, P. Braca, and P. Willett, “Malicious AIS Spooﬁng and
Abnormal Stealth Deviations: A Comprehensive Statistical Framework
for Maritime Anomaly Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2093–2108, 2021.
[25] M. Strohmeier, G. Tresoldi, L. Granger, and V . Lenders, “Building an
avionics laboratory for cybersecurity testing,” in Proceedings of the
15th Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation and Test , 2022, pp.
10–18.
[26] M. C. Kim, W. S. Oh, J. H. Lee, J. B. Yim, and Y . D. Koo, “Develop-
ment of a system integration laboratory for aircraft avionics systems,”
in2008 IEEE/AIAA 27th Digital Avionics Systems Conference , 2008.
[27] A. Viana Sanchez and C. Taylor, “Reference architecture test-bed for
avionics (rasta): A software building blocks overview,” DASIA 2010-
Data Systems In Aerospace , vol. 682, p. 49, 2010.
[28] V . Dey, V . Pudi, A. Chattopadhyay, and Y . Elovici, “Security Vul-
nerabilities of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Countermeasures: An
Experimental Study,” in 2018 31st International Conference on VLSI
Design and 2018 17th International Conference on Embedded Systems
(VLSID) , 2018, pp. 398–403.
[29] S. Khandker, H. Turtiainen, A. Costin, and T. H ¨am¨al¨ainen, “On the
(In)Security of 1090ES and UAT978 Mobile Cockpit Information Sys-
tems–An Attacker Perspective on the Availability of ADS-B Safety- and
Mission-Critical Systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 37 718–37 730,
2022.
[30] “McMurdo Smartﬁnd G8 AIS Smartﬁnd G8 Smartﬁnd E8 EPIRB-AIS
USER MANUAL,” https://media1.svb-media.de/media/snr/512618/pdf/
manual 2019-05-28 13-09-27 8e84e6e032df7e73b7a760e7711bfe96.
pdf, accessed: 2022-10-24.
[31] Radio Frequency Regulation 4 , TRAFICOM/185774/03.04.05.00/2021,
Dec 2021.
[32] A.-V . Predescu and T. H. Stelkens-Kobsch, “Aviation Security Lab: A
testbed for security testing of current and future aviation technologies,”
in2022 IEEE/AIAA 41st Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC) ,
2022, pp. 1–5.
[33] R. Hiesgen, M. Nawrocki, T. C. Schmidt, and M. W ¨ahlisch, “he Race
to the Vulnerable: Measuring the Log4j Shell Incident,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.02544 , 2022.
viii