February 23, 2025 100 CommentsTrump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber ,
Consumer Protections
One month into his second term, President Trump’ s actions to shrink the government through
mass layof fs, ﬁrings and withholding funds allocated by Congress have thrown federal
cybersecurity and consumer protection programs into disarray . At the same time, agencies are
battling an ongoing ef fort by the world’ s richest man to wrest control over their networks and data.
  3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 1/26Image: Shutterstock. Greg Meland.
The Trump administration has ﬁred at least 130 employees at the federal government’ s foremost
cybersecurity body — the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency  (CISA). Those
dismissals reportedly  included CISA  staff dedicated to securing U.S. elections, and ﬁghting
misinformation and foreign inﬂuence operations.
Earlier this week, technologists with Elon Musk’ s Department of Government Efﬁciency
(DOGE) arrived at CISA  and gained access to the agency’ s email and networked ﬁles. Those
DOGE staf fers include Edward “Big Balls” Coristine , a 19-year-old former denizen of the
“Com,”  an archipelago of Discord and Telegram chat channels that function as a kind of
distributed cybercriminal social network .
The investigative journalist Jacob Silverman  writes  that Coristine is the grandson of Valery
Martynov , a KGB double agent who spied for the United States. Silverman recounted how
Martynov’ s wife Natalya Martynova  moved to the United States with her two children after her
husband’ s death.
“Her son became a V irginia police ofﬁcer who sometimes posts comments on blogs about his
historically famous father ,” Silverman wrote. “Her daughter became a ﬁnancial professional who
married Charles Coristine, the proprietor of LesserEvil, a snack company . Among their children is
a 19-year-old young man named Edward Coristine, who currently wields an unknown amount of
power and authority over the inner-workings of our federal government.”3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 2/26Another member of DOGE is Christopher Stanley , formerly senior director for security
engineering at X and principal security engineer at Musk’ s SpaceX . Stanley , 33, had a brush with
celebrity on Twitter in 2015 when he leaked the user database for the DDoS-for-hire service
LizardStresser , and soon faced threats of physical violence against his family .
My 2015 story on that leak  did not name Stanley , but he exposed himself as the source by posting
a video about it on his Youtube channel. A review of domain names registered by Stanley shows
he went by the nickname “enKrypt,” and was the former owner of a pirated software and hacking
forum called error33[.]net , as well as theC0re , a video game cheating community .
“A NATIONAL  CYBERA TTACK”
DOGE has been steadily gaining sensitive network access to federal agencies that hold a
staggering amount of personal and ﬁnancial information on Americans, including the Social
Security Administration (SSA), the Department of Homeland Security , the Ofﬁce of
Personnel Management  (OPM), and the Treasury Department .
Most recently , DOGE has sought broad access to systems at the Internal Revenue Service  that
contain the personal tax information on millions of Americans, including how much individuals
earn and owe, property information, and even details related to child custody agreements. The
New York Times reported Friday  that the IRS had reached an agreement whereby a single DOGE
employee — 25-year-old Gavin Kliger — will be allowed to see only anonymized taxpayer
information.
The rapidity with which DOGE has riﬂed through one federal database after another in the name
of unearthing “massive fraud” by government agencies has alarmed many security experts, who
warned that DOGE’ s actions bypassed essential safeguards and security measures.
“The most alarming aspect isn’t just the access being granted,” wrote  Bruce Schneier  and Davi
Ottenheimer , referring to DOGE as a national cyberattack. “It’ s the systematic dismantling of
security measures that would detect and prevent misuse—including standard incident response
protocols, auditing, and change-tracking mechanisms—by removing the career ofﬁcials in charge
of those security measures and replacing them with inexperienced operators.”
Jacob W illiams  is a former hacker with the U.S. National Security Agency  who now works as
managing director of the cybersecurity ﬁrm Hunter Labs . Williams kicked a virtual hornet’ s nest
last week when he posted on LinkedIn that the network incursions by DOGE were “a bigger threat
to U.S. federal government information systems than China.”
Williams said while he doesn’t believe anyone at DOGE would intentionally harm the integrity and
availability of these systems, it’ s widely reported (and not denied) that DOGE introduced code
changes into multiple federal IT  systems. These code changes, he maintained, are not following
the normal process for vetting and review given to federal government IT  systems.3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 3/26“For those thinking ‘I’m glad they aren’t following the normal federal government IT  processes,
those are too burdensome’  I get where you’re coming from,” Williams wrote . “But another name
for ‘red tape’  are ‘controls.’  If you’re comfortable bypassing controls for the advancement of your
agenda, I have questions – mostly about whether you do this in your day job too. Please tag your
employer letting them know your position when you comment that controls aren’t important
(doubly so if you work in cybersecurity). All satire aside, if you’re comfortable abandoning controls
for expediency , I implore you to decide where the line is that you won’t cross in that regard.”
The DOGE website’ s “wall of receipts” boasts that Musk and his team have saved the federal
government more than $55 billion through staf f reductions, lease cancellations and terminated
contracts. But a team of reporters at The New York T imes  found the math that could back up
those checks is marred with accounting errors, incorrect assumptions, outdated data and other
mistakes.
For example, DOGE claimed it saved $8 billion in one contract, when the total amount was
actually $8 million, The Times found.
“Some contracts the group claims credit for were double- or triple-counted,” reads a Times story
with six bylines . “Another initially contained an error that inﬂated the totals by billions of dollars.
While the DOGE team has surely cut some number of billions of dollars, its slapdash accounting
adds to a pattern of recklessness by the group, which has recently gained access to sensitive
government payment systems.”
So far , the DOGE website does not inspire conﬁdence: W e learned last week that the doge.gov
administrators somehow left their database wide open, allowing someone to publish messages
that ridiculed the site’ s insecurity .3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 4/26A screenshot of the DOGE website after it was defaced with the message: “These ‘experts’  left their database open – roro”
APPOINTMENTS
Trump’ s efforts to grab federal agencies by their data has seen him replace career civil servants
who refused to allow DOGE access to agency networks. CNN reports  that Michelle King , acting
commissioner of the Social Security Administration for more than 30 years, was shown the door
after she denied DOGE access to sensitive information.
King was replaced by Leland Dudek , formerly a senior advisor in the SSA ’s Ofﬁce of Program
Integrity . This week, Dudek posted a now-deleted message on LinkedIn acknowledging he had
been placed on administrative leave for cooperating with DOGE.
“I confess,” Dudek wrote. “I bullied agency executives, shared executive contact information, and
circumvented the chain of command to connect DOGE with the people who get stuf f done. I
confess. I asked where the fat was and is in our contracts so we can make the right tough
choices.”3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 5/26Dudek’ s message on LinkedIn.
According to Wired, the National Institute of Standards and T echnology  (NIST) was also
bracing this week for roughly 500 staf fers to be ﬁred, which could have serious impacts on NIST’ s
cybersecurity standards and software vulnerability tracking work.
“And cuts last week at the US Digital Service included the cybersecurity lead for the central
Veterans Affairs portal, V A.gov , potentially leaving V A systems and data more vulnerable without
someone in his role,” Wired’ s Andy Greenberg and Lily Hay Newman wrote .
NextGov reports  that Trump named the Department of Defense’ s new chief information security
ofﬁcer: Katie Arrington , a former South Carolina state lawmaker who helped steer Pentagon
cybersecurity contracting policy before being put on leave amid accusations that she disclosed
classiﬁed data from a military intelligence agency .
NextGov notes that the National Security Agency  suspended her clearance in 2021, although
the exact reasons that led to the suspension and her subsequent leave were classiﬁed. Arrington3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 6/26argued that the suspension was a politically motivated ef fort to silence her .
Trump also appointed the former chief operating ofﬁcer of the Republican National Committee
as the new head of the Ofﬁce of National Cyber Director . Sean Cairncross , who has no formal
experience in technology or security , will be responsible for coordinating national cybersecurity
policy , advising the president on cyber threats, and ensuring a uniﬁed federal response to
emerging cyber-risks, Politico writes .
DarkReading  reports  that Cairncross would share responsibility for advising the president on
cyber matters, along with the director of cyber at the White House National Security Council
(NSC) — a group that advises the president on all matters security related, and not just cyber .
CONSUMER PROTECTION?
The president also ordered staf fers at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau  (CFPB) to
stop most work. Created by Congress in 201 1 to be a clearinghouse of consumer complaints, the
CFPB has sued some of the nation’ s largest ﬁnancial institutions for violating consumer protection
laws.
The CFPB says its actions have put nearly $18 billion back in Americans’  pockets in the form of
monetary compensation or canceled debts, and imposed $4 billion in civil money penalties
against violators. The CFPB’ s homepage has featured a “404: Page not found” error for weeks
now.
Trump has appointed Russell V ought , the architect of the conservative policy playbook Project
2025 , to be the CFPB’ s acting director . Vought has publicly favored abolishing the agency , as has
Elon Musk, whose ef forts to remake X into a payments platform would otherwise be regulated by
the CFPB.
The New York Times recently published a useful graphic showing all of the government stafﬁng
changes, including the ﬁring of several top ofﬁcials, af fecting agencies with federal investigations
into or regulatory battles with Musk’ s companies. Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee
also have released a comprehensive account (PDF)  of Musk’ s various conﬂicts of interest.3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 7/26Image: nytimes.com
As the Times notes, Musk and his companies have repeatedly failed to comply with federal
reporting protocols aimed at protecting state secrets, and these failures have prompted at least
three federal reviews. Those include an inquiry launched last year by the Defense Department’ s
Ofﬁce of Inspector General. Four days after taking ofﬁce, Trump ﬁred the DoD inspector general
along with 17 other inspectors general.
The Trump administration also shifted the enforcement priorities of the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission  (SEC) away from prosecuting misconduct in the cryptocurrency sector ,
reassigning lawyers and renaming the unit  to focus more on “cyber and emerging technologies.”
Reuters reports  that the former SEC chair Gary Gensler  made ﬁghting misconduct in a sector he
termed the “wild west” a priority for the agency , targeting not only cryptocurrency fraudsters but
also the large ﬁrms that facilitate trading such as Coinbase .3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 8/26On Friday , Coinbase said the SEC planned to withdraw its lawsuit against the crypto exchange.
Also on Friday , the cryptocurrency exchange Bybit  announced on X  that a cybersecurity breach
led to the theft of more than $1.4 billion worth of cryptocurrencies — making it the largest crypto
heist ever .
ORGANIZED CRIME AND CORRUPTION
On Feb. 10, Trump ordered  executive branch agencies to stop enforcing the U.S. Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act, which froze foreign bribery investigations, and even allows for “remedial
actions” of past enforcement actions deemed “inappropriate.”
Trump’ s action also disbanded the Kleptocracy Asset Recovery Initiative  and KleptoCapture
Task Force  — units which proved their value in corruption cases and in seizing the assets of
sanctioned Russian oligarchs — and diverted resources away from investigating white-collar
crime.
That’ s according to the independent Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project
(OCCRP), an investigative journalism outlet that until very recently was funded in part by the U.S.
Agency for International Development  (USAID).
The OCCRP  lost nearly a third of its funding and was forced to lay of f 43 reporters and staf f after
Trump moved to shutter USAID and freeze its spending. NBC News reports  the Trump
administration plans to gut the agency and leave fewer than 300 staf fers on the job out of the
current 8,000 direct hires and contractors.
The Global Investigative Journalism Network  wrote  this week that the sudden hold on USAID
foreign assistance funding has frozen an estimated $268 million in agreed grants for independent
media and the free ﬂow of information in more than 30 countries — including several under
repressive regimes.
Elon Musk has called USAID “a criminal organization” without evidence, and promoted fringe
theories  on his social media platform X that the agency operated without oversight and was rife
with fraud. Just months before the election, USAID’ s Ofﬁce of Inspector General announced  an
investigation into USAID’ s oversight of Starlink satellite terminals provided to the government of
Ukraine.
KrebsOnSecurity this week heard from a trusted source that all outgoing email from USAID now
carries a notation of “ sensitive but unclassiﬁed ,” a designation that experts say could make it more
difﬁcult for journalists and others to obtain USAID email records under the Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA). On Feb. 20, Fedscoop reported  also hearing the same thing from multiple sources,
noting that the added message cannot be seen by senders until after the email is sent.
FIVE BULLETS3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 9/26On Feb. 18, Trump issued an executive order  declaring that only the U.S. attorney general and
the president can provide authoritative interpretations of the law for the executive branch, and that
this authority extends to independent agencies operating under the executive branch.
Trump is arguing that Article II, Clause 1 of the Constitution vests this power with the president.
However , jurist.org writes  that Article II does not expressly state the president or any other person
in the executive branch has the power to interpret laws.
“The article states that the president is required to ‘take care that the laws be faithfully executed,'”
Juris noted. “Jurisdiction to interpret laws and determine constitutionality belongs to the judicial
branch under Article III. The framers of the Constitution designed the separation of duties to
prevent any single branch of government from becoming too powerful.”
The executive order requires all agencies to submit to “performance standards and management
objectives” to be established by the White House Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, and to report
periodically to the president.
Those performance metrics are already being requested: Employees at multiple federal agencies
on Saturday reported receiving an email from the Ofﬁce of Personnel Management  ordering
them to reply with a set of bullet points justifying their work for the past week.
“Please reply to this email with approx. 5 bullets of what you accomplished last week and cc your
manager ,” the notice read. “Please do not send any classiﬁed information, links, or attachments.
Deadline is this Monday at 1 1:59 p.m. EST .”3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 10/26An email sent by the OPM to more than two million federal employees late in the afternoon
EST on Saturday , Feb. 22.
In a social media post Saturday , Musk said the directive came at the behest of President Trump,
and that failure to respond would be taken as a resignation. Meanwhile, Bloomberg writes  the
Department of Justice  has been urging employees to hold of f replying out of concern doing so3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 11/26could trigger ethics violations. The National T reasury Employees Union  also is advising its
employees not to respond .
A legal battle over Trump’ s latest executive order is bound to join more than 70 other lawsuits
currently underway to halt the administration’ s efforts to massively reduce the size of the federal
workforce through layof fs, ﬁrings and attrition.
KING TRUMP?
On Feb. 15, the president posted on social media, “He who saves his Country does not violate
any Law ,” citing a quote often attributed to the French dictator Napoleon Bonaparte. Four days
later, Trump referred to himself as “the king” on social media, while the White House nonchalantly
posted an illustration of him wearing a crown.
Trump has been publicly musing about running for an unconstitutional third-term in ofﬁce , a
statement that some of his supporters dismiss as Trump just trying to rile his liberal critics.
However , just days after Trump began his second term, Rep. Andy Ogles  (R-T enn.) introduced a
bill to amend the Constitution so that Trump — and any other future president — can be elected to
serve a third term.
This week at the Conservative Political Action Conference  (CPAC), Rep. Ogles reportedly led
a group of Trump supporters calling itself the “Third Term Project,” which is trying to gain support
for the bill from GOP  lawmakers. The event featured images of Trump depicted as Caesar .3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 12/26A banner at the CP AC conference this week in support of The Third Term Project, a group of conservatives trying to
gain support for a bill to amend the Constitution and allow Trump to run for a third term.
Russia continues to be among the world’ s top exporters of cybercrime, narcotics, money
laundering, human trafﬁcking, disinformation, war and death, and yet the Trump administration
has suddenly broken with the W estern world in normalizing relations with Moscow .
This week President Trump stunned U.S. allies by repeating Kremlin talking points that Ukraine is
somehow responsible for Russia’ s invasion, and that Ukrainian President V olodymyr Zelensky
is a “dictator .” The president repeated these lies even as his administration is demanding that3/5/25, 10:30 AM Trump 2.0 Brings Cuts to Cyber, Consumer Protections – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/trump-2-0-brings-cuts-to-cyber-consumer-protections/#more-70399 13/26