 
   
  
  
Statement before the House Energy and Commerce  
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology   
  
  
“Securing Communications Networks from  
Foreign Adversaries”  
  
  
  
  
A Testimony by:  
  
James Andrew Lewis  
Center for Strategic and International Studies  
  
  
  
  
February 15, 2024  
2123 Rayburn House Office Building   
    
 
 
Lewis: Written Testimony, E&C Subcommittee on Communications & Technology  02/15/2024  
    
  
2  
  Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Matsui, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on 
Communications and Technology, thank you for inviting me to participate in today’s hearing. My 
comments today are my own and should not be attributed to the Center for Strategic  and 
International Studies.   
  
Poorly secured communications networks create real risk by opening opportunities for espionage 
and for the disruption of critical services. While there has been real progress in the past few years 
at improving network security, the United States has only b egun to grapple with the broad set of 
digital vulnerabilities.  Many of these are the result o f close commercial relations with China.  The 
United States need to rethink and restructure its policies to take into account the competition with 
China and the importance of network security for our national security.     
  
National security risks are one reason the topic is of strategic interest.  The other reason is that 
technologies like 5G and 6G provide the foundations of the ubiquitous, interconnected digital 
infrastructure that is the key to future economic growth. Ubi quitous connectivity means there will 
be globally interconnected networks and services that will be able to access, over the internet, 
immense data and computing resources. This will over time increase productivity and innovation..  
Technology is a new fie ld for international competition and the terms of this competition are the 
ability to innovate, to build digital infrastructure, and to create resilient supply chains.  This is a 
different kind of competition and China has real strengths.  While it is incr easingly hampered by 
its authoritarian political system, it is clearly competitive with the United States in areas like 
artificial intelligence, quantum communications, satellites, and 5G spectrum allocation.    
  
Digital competition for influence and wealth coincides with the need to reduce China’s role in 
Western supply networks and its presence in Western digital infrastructure. The years since China 
opened to the West have seen the rise of globally interdependen t and interconnected innovation.  
Chinese companies have been interwoven into Western supply chains. Western companies remain 
attracted to China as a supplier and as a market, although they are increasingly cognizant of the 
political risks of doing busines s there. Careful scrutiny of this commercial and technological 
relationship with China is long overdue, but mutual interdependence complicates efforts to change 
it.   
  
The most immediate problem is spying.  Chinese espionage against the United States has reached 
unprecedented levels, greater than anything seen in the Cold War and this comes at a time of 
steadily increasing global connectivity based on a range of differen t communications technologies.   
This means that anything connected to the internet can be used to collect information.  China has 
built the world’s largest surveillance system.  Information technology is at the heart of this system.  
Espionage was always part of Chinese policy, both against its own people and against other 
countries, particularly the United States.  
  Lewis: Written Testimony, E&C Subcommittee on Communications & Technology  02/15/2024  
    
  
3  
  China’s intelligence agencies are inventive and well resourced, making them formidable opponents 
and they have had remarkable successes. China’s 2017 National Intelligence Law  mandates that 
all Chinese citizens and companies must support, assist, and cooperate with state intelligence 
efforts. This law is notable for its extraterritorial provisions, which allows Chinese intelligence 
agencies to compel cooperation from Chinese cit izens and entities overseas. The law significantly 
expanded the legal framework for China's intelligence activities. There is no appeal and the process 
is not transparent. Even if a company’s record is spotless, it can be compelled at any time to provide 
data or other assistance. Chinese companies do not have a choice when it comes to  cooperating 
with the Chinese government.    
  
Defending against cyber espionage is a challenge for all countries and this challenge will grow as 
we move to a world of ubiquitous connectivity over digital networks. Cyber defense has not kept 
up with cyber espionage. The nature of espionage has changed in an increasingly interconnected 
world.  The ability to manipulate data, sometimes using artificial intelligence tools, has 
transformed intelligence analysis the same way it is transforming business. Companies collect 
masses of data and develop sophistica ted software tools to better identify customers and markets. 
Intelligence agencies do the same for espionage purposes. In 2015, Chinese intelligence entities 
hacked the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), along with several large companies and 
acquired i mmense databases containing the personal information of millions of Americans. The 
OPM hack was part of a larger data -centric intelligence campaign by China to acquire data to 
populate Chinese “big data” programs for intelligence. OPM data gives China the foundation of 
data-intensive spying and China, for reasons that are not always apparent, continue to acquire 
masses of data on Americans.   
  
Fears that the OPM hack would give China insights to improve their recruitment of Americans 
appear to be misplaced. The primary motive for hacking OPM was, as is so often the case in 
Chinese surveillance efforts, most likely directed at their own populatio n, to allow the Chinese 
security services to better identify Chinese citizens who are sources for the United States.  China 
has made massive efforts in data analytics and biometrics (e.g. facial recognition, fingerprinting, 
and DNA analysis) to create comp rehensive surveillance programs and in the last few years appear 
to have extended these efforts to go beyond their own population (although it is still the primary 
target, to other countries and in particular the United States.)  
  
The problem of Chinese network espionage comes after years of building a symbiotic and 
interdependent tech relationship with China. Western investment, trade, and education, combined 
with China’s immense market, human capital resources, economic policies a nd reinforced by 
extensive commercial espionage, helped make China the second -largest economy in the world. 
China’s authoritarian governance, disregard for human rights, strategic investments in key 
technologies like telecommunications and drones, its disr egard for international norms, and 
predatory trade behavior raise unavoidable foreign policy concerns. The interconnected digital 
supply chain means that China can use its position as supplier for espionage purposes, degrade or Lewis: Written Testimony, E&C Subcommittee on Communications & Technology  02/15/2024  
    
  
4  
  disrupt services, or to deny access to vital technologies. So far, we have seen rampant espionage, 
but so far no disruption. However, recent testimony from the FBI, Cyber Command and others 
highlighted that disruption of critical services by China is a gro wing and significant risk.    
  
The deep interconnections in Western and Chinese digital communications technology creates risk. 
China could use  information technologies and services in ways that provide intelligence advantage 
and can harm American national security and the privacy of Americans. Information technology 
products and services that are widely used in the United States create risk becau se of their internet 
connectivity. Millions of devices in use in the United States currently run software from companies 
with ties to China or Russia and source code developed by companies in these countries is 
embedded in IT products and services. The Department of Commerce’s new Office of Information 
and Communications Technology and Services (ICTS) is a first step in trying to manage this 
problem.  
  
It will take years to reduce these risks.  Decoupling or derisking are not solutions, at least in the 
near term.  Currently, the West cannot “decouple” from China, nor can China decouple from the 
West. Global technology markets are too interconnected for C old War -style bifurcation or regime 
modeled on antiques like COCOM, a Cold War export control regime. Decoupling is not 
achievable, even though China itself wants to decouple. While China remains reliant on Western 
technology, markets, and finance, western  companies rely on China for components and significant 
dependencies have developed between Western companies and Chinese suppliers and markets. 
Given this, reducing China’s presence in the digital ecosystem and the digital technology supply 
chain will be incremental and iterative.    
  
Between Chinese government investments, industrial espionage, and Western companies decision 
to move manufacturing to China, it plays a central role in supplying hardware, eliciting concern 
and countermeasure since 2015. China role in software is not as wi dely recognized.  The way 
software is written provides opportunities for spying.  Software is often written in a haphazard 
fashion. Software products blend code from a variety of sources, including proprietary software 
(sometimes can include re -using old c ode), but also open source software that is in the public 
domain, and software provided under license by third parties. Unsurprisingly, given the strong 
Chinese IT industry and the deep interconnections to it, open source and third party software 
modules c an come from Chinese sources and can create risk.  Legacy code is vulnerable (and 
anything more than a few years counts as legacy) but still in use, and the standards for secure 
software writing are unevenly applied. All of these create vulnerabilities tha t hackers can exploit. 
Changing this situation will take time but shrink the opportunism for China and others to exploit 
vulnerabilities. Creating disclosure or reporting mechanisms for software and communications 
devices originating from foreign entities that are deemed adversarial to the United States could 
also be a first step.   
  Lewis: Written Testimony, E&C Subcommittee on Communications & Technology  02/15/2024  
    
  
5  
  There are other opponents who are part of the global software industry, but none are as deeply 
intertwined with the American tech sector and none of them have the scope or wealth of China.  
The DPRK has a software industry and uses it for both espionage an d for income, but it is small 
and limited. Iran has a software industry and it can supply private hackers who work with the 
government, but not much of a presence in global markets. Russia had a strong software industry, 
but it, like Iran and North Korea, has its presence in Western markets greatly reduced. The Russian 
IT sector has been decimated by the war in Ukraine as many Russians with tech skills fled the 
country. Only China has a major global presence in hardware, software, apps, and increasingly, 
cloud services. China’s leaders are determined to keep the Chinese Communist Party in power and 
their intention, under President Xi, is to reshape international affairs and assert China’s dominant 
rule in them  Information technology plays a central role in this.   
  
For U.S. government software and technology acquisitions, critical infrastructure, and for leading 
technology companies, the risk of hostile Chinese action to penetrate networks and acquire data is 
certain. Any use of Chinese software on devices or applica tions connected to the internet can 
provide an opportunity for access by Chinese intelligence agencies is a risk.   Knowing what 
software has Chinese components can be difficult.  A first step lies with the “Software Bill of 
Material (SBOM)” process now ma naged by the Department of Homeland Security. A “software 
bill of materials” (SBOM) list the source of a software product and its components. SBOM can 
help identify software with Chinese elements and decide on the risks and benefits of its use.     
  
It would be useful to increase transparency in the source of digital technology as a first step towards 
assessing risk. Proposed legislation for a study on  the national security risks posed by routers, 
modems, and devices would be helpful. Small and home office networks have become a target for 
foreign adversaries, as they are often less secure and can offer access to corporate networks.  Just 
this month, the Department of Justice announced that it has disrupted a network made of hundreds 
of based small of fice or home office routers used by China for possible use against critical 
infrastructure.    
  
Another example is the use of ‘software development kits’ (SDK) that provide portions of code for 
larger programs and apps.  SDKs provide tools and functions that speed toe creation of software. 
Some reports say that Chinese SDKs developed by major Chinese  software companies like 
TenCent are found in a number of well -known apps and online services. The use of Chinese SDKs 
could potentially provide access to data disruption of services. SDK are in some ways the greatest 
risk because they are in effect invisi ble, embedded in an American app.  
  
The emphasis on promoting secure software development put forward by this Administration in 
response to the Solar Winds incident also can help reduce risk. Changing this situation will take 
time but there are ways to shrink the opportunity that technologic al interdependence creates for 
China and others to exploit vulnerabilities.     
  Lewis: Written Testimony, E&C Subcommittee on Communications & Technology  02/15/2024  
    
  
6  
  Banning the use of federal funds to purchase Huawei and ZTE equipment in the Secure and Trusted 
Communications Networks Act of 2019 was an important step, but only an initial one.  Adding 
additional companies, such as DJI, builds on this precedent. But dec oupling or derisking are, at 
best, long -term solutions. Pursuing individual companies, even large ones, creates the risk of 
leading to cumbersome bureaucracies that provide piecemeal solutions. Some existing authorities, 
like the International Economic Eme rgency Powers Act (IEEPA) provide a good starting point, but 
additional authorities from Congress may be necessary.  
  
While China remains reliant on Western technology, markets, and finance, significant 
dependencies have developed between Western companies and Chinese suppliers and markets. The 
Department of Commerce’s new office, recent Executive Orders, and changes in a cquisition 
regulations will let the United States begin to manage a complex national security problem, but we 
are only at the start.    
  
Since decoupling is not possible, given the deep interconnections built up over the last forty years, 
this makes the problem one of managing technology supply chains with a hostile and untrustworthy 
partner who uses predatory trade practices and is underta king the largest espionage campaign in 
history against the United States. This is an uncomfortable situation that cannot be changed rapidly, 
but by using a combination of new legislation and executive branch authorities, the risk can be 
minimized and manag ed.  
  
Broader solutions could include finally passing a national privacy law, expanding transparency in 
supply chain networks, and restricting egregious cases where the use of Chinese technology poses 
potential risk. These should be seen as initial steps to redu ce the risk created by technology 
dependence. Not all Chinese technology poses risk, those risks can vary with use, and many risks 
can be mitigated, but the Subcommittee’s work in building a framework of new authorities is 
important, essential, and long ov erdue.  
  
I thank the Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify and look forward to any questions you may 
have.    