Journal of Cybersecurity  , 2023, 1–13 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyad018  
Research  paper 
Research  paper  
Executive  decision-makers:  a scenario-based  
approach  to assessing  organizational  cyber-risk  
perception  
Simon  Parkin  1 , Kristen  Kuhn  2 and Siraj  A. Shaikh  3 , 4 , * 
1 Faculty  of Technology,  Policy and Management,  TU Delft, Jaffalaan  5, 2628 BX, Delft, the Netherlands  , 2 Centre for 
Trust, Peace and Social Relations  (CTPSR),  Coventry  University,  Coventry,  CV1 5FB, United Kingdom  , 3 Systems  
Security  Group (SSG), Department  of Computer  Science,  Swansea  University,  Bay Campus,  Fabian Way, Swansea,  
SA1 8EN, United Kingdom  and 4 Research  Centre on Security,  Rule of Law and High TechnologiesResearch  Centre 
on Security,  Rule of Law and High Technologiesniversidad  Nebrija,  Madrid  28015, Spain 
∗Correspondence  address.  Systems  Security  Group (SSG), Department  of Computer  Science,  Swansea  University,  Bay 
Campus,  Fabian Way, Swansea,  SA1 8EN, United Kingdom.  Tel: + 44 7939 233 995; E-mail: s.a.shaikh@swansea.ac.uk  
Received  28 December  2022; revised 1 June 2023; accepted  24 July 2023 
Abstract  
The executi  ve leader  ship in corporate  organizations  is increasingly  challenged  with managing  
cyber-risks,  as an impor  tant par t of wider business  risk management.  Cyber-risks  are complex,  with 
the threat landscape  evolving,  including  digital  infrastructure  issues  such as trust in networked  sup- 
ply chains,  and emerging  technologies.  Moreover,  engaging  organizational  leadership  to assess  for 
risk management  is also difficult.  This paper reports  on a scenario-driven,  workshop-based  study 
undertaken  with executive  leadership  to assess  for cybersecurity  and cyber-risk  perception  related  
to preparation  for, and response  to, potential  incidents.  The study involves  leader  ship member  s at 
a large public–private  organization.  Our approach  utilizes  scenarios,  which are structured  in their 
design  to explore  and analyse  aspects  of business  risk, risk ownership,  technological  complexity,  
and uncertainty  faced by an organizational  leadership.  The method  offers a means  to engage  with 
leadership  at real-world  organizations,  capturing  capacity  and insights  to manage  business  risks 
due to cyberattacks.  
Key words: security  management,  decision  making, business  continuity,  risk analysis  
Introduction  
As enterprise  digitization  and automation  play an increasingly  cen- 
tral role in how organizations  are operated,  the security  of networked  
systems,  services,  and corporate  IT is becoming  increasingly  critical 
to business  continuity.  Cybersecurity  is then increasingly  relevant  as 
a responsibility  of decision-making  stakeholders  in organizations  [ 1 ], 
including  senior organizational  leadership  [ 2 ]. 
Notable  forms of cyber-related  attacks include destructive  mal- 
ware (as with Maersk  [ 3 ]) and ransomware  attacks (as with Norsk 
Hydro [ 4 ]). In early 2021, Colonial  Pipeline  was impacted  by ran- 
somware,  with the US government  then acting to retrieve  some of 
the ransom  [ 5 ], highlighting  the complex,  multistakeholder  nature 
of cybersecurity  decisions.  Cybersecurity  incidents  can last for some 
time, incurring  increased  costs and disruption  to both the business  and customers.  The understanding  of incidents  also evolves rapidly 
under conditions  of uncertainty  as details emerge.  It is then key that 
executive  leadership  are prepared  for managing  incidents  where there 
is an evolving  cybersecurity  element.  
The understanding  of risk arising out of such incidents  is there- 
fore important,  and is the core of the focus of this paper. Such an 
understanding  would involve at least three aspects of risk in busi- 
nesses to be assessed  including:  risk ownership  (who is best placed 
to take action);  type of risk (how is the risk recognized  in a way 
that it can be responded  to, for instance,  by following  regulated  pro- 
cedures  or adapting  to novel crises); the level of risk (with it being 
security,  the severity  and urgency,  which determines  the planning).  If 
such resilience  is planned  into business  procedures,  this boosts ability 
to weather  future emergencies  [ 6 ]. 
1 © The Author(s)  2023. Published  by Oxford University  Press. This is an Open Access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons  Attribution  License 
( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ), which permits unrestricted  reuse, distribution,  and reproduction  in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
2 Parkin et al. 
Our approach  lays down the foundations  for a systematic  
scenario-based  risk exploration  amongst  senior decision-makers  in 
organizations.  The use of scenarios  have the advantage  that cyberse-  
curity risks new to the organization  could be considered  in terms of 
perceived  relevance,  responsibilities,  and necessary  responses  (rather 
than leaving it to responding  to such novel risks in a more ad-hoc 
fashion  when they happen).  Participants  may already  have what they 
believe to be an appropriate  response,  where our approach  is also an 
opportunity  to assure themselves  that they are prepared.  
Our approach  is also tailored  to our target audience,  to ensure 
that the format for engagement  is suited to them in terms of time 
constraints,  level of technical  knowledge,  and weaving  emerging  cy- 
bersecurity  risks with the business  risk landscape  that they would be 
familiar  with. 
Here, we explore  perceptions  of cybersecurity-related  risks at 
the highest levels of an organization  relative  to other business  con- 
cerns. Within this, we also investigate  how cybersecurity  is per- 
ceived within new or existing  business  continuity  and incident  re- 
sponse processes,  with a view to informing  business  preparedness  
[ 1 ,7 ]. Informed  by existing  research  [ 7 ], we engaged  with senior gov- 
ernance  and business  continuity  decision-makers  through  a struc- 
tured, scenario-driven  and repeatable  exercise  intended  for executive  
decision-makers.  These planning  activities  aim to inform ‘practices  
for preparedness’  [ 6 ], specifically  in the cybersecurity  domain.  
This paper makes a contribution  towards  capacity  to practise  
such preparedness,  and sets out to address  the following  research  
questions:  
r RQ1: Does a scenario-based  approach  to articulation  of business  
risks (arising  out of cyber-risks)  effectively  capture  insights  from 
business  decision-makers?  
This is founded  on a systematic  approach  to the construction  
of scenarios.  r RQ2: Do decision-makers  across the wider business  perceive  
whether  cyber-risk  relates to their domain  of decisions?  
This would include assessing  the perceived  nature of risks and 
attribution  of risk ownership.  
We conducted  a half-day  online workshop,  with nine members  of 
executive  leadership  of a large public–private  sector organization  in 
a developed  economy,  which provides  a range of services  including  
postal and financial  services.  The organization  has dedicated  respon-  
sibilities  for the General  Data Protection  Regulation  (GDPR)  compli-  
ance, incident  reporting,  and business  continuity  preparedness.  Dur- 
ing the workshop,  participants  were presented  with progressions  of a 
cybersecurity  incident  as a sequence  of four scenarios  (ransomware,  
control system malfunction,  power and connectivity  outage,  nation–
state disruption).  For scenarios  to appear realistic  and at the same 
time novel and engaging  to participants,  the scenario  design lever- 
ages the notion of ‘near future’ [ 8 ] scenarios.  Such an approach  has 
been used in war games and strategy  exercises,  to draw on existing  
experiences.  
We found that our scenario  design resonated  with participants,  
prompting  consideration  of the role of cyber-risks  relevant  to other 
kinds of risks, such as critical services  and the potential  of physical  
harm. The role of crisis management  processes  and task forces was 
highlighted  by participants,  as a means to coordinate  the complexity  
of managing  cyber-related  incidents  and to align the perspectives  of 
different  organization-internal  stakeholders.  
The rest of this paper is organized  as follows:  background  and 
related work are discussed  in the ‘Background  and related work’ 
section;  our survey and workshop  methodology  are detailed  in the 
‘Methodology’  section,  with the results of the workshop  presented  in the ‘Results’  section.  Discussion,  including  consideration  of limi- 
tations,  appears  in the ‘Discussion’  section,  with closing remarks  and 
future work detailed  in the ‘Conclusion  and future work’ section.  
Background  and related  work 
Where cybersecurity  research  has investigated  high-level  decisions  
about how the security  of organizations  and systems  are managed,  
it has mainly focused  at the level of strategic  management  of secu- 
rity and the experiences  of senior security  managers  [ 9–11 ]. Research  
has seldom reached  the level of executive  decision-makers  interact-  
ing with other functions  including  cybersecurity,  at the highest level 
of an organization.  
We frame ‘executive’  decision-makers  to be individuals  who make 
decisions,  which drive the direction  and strategy  of an organization.  
Where ‘each board needs to set its own direction  and tone for cy- 
ber security’  [ 12 ], we regard this as being embodied  by the ways 
in which top-level  strategic  decision-making  includes  cybersecurity.  
While executive  boards take many forms and may operate  varying  
reporting  structures  [ 9 ], here, we focuse on governance-related  deci- 
sions, which involve multiple  executive  decision-makers  of an orga- 
nization,  where cybersecurity  events may enter that purview  (as with 
e.g. ransomware  or malware  attacks targeting  individual  organiza-  
tions). Executive  decision-makers  have a need to address  multiple  
directives  at once, foremost  that the organization  is secure while also 
being able to operate  in its primary  capacity  (as may be determined  
by the sector and supply chains it operates  within).  
Top-level  decision-making  involves  complex  interactions  between  
leadership  teams [ 13 ], around ‘episodic’  decisions  and strategic  is- 
sues. Risk perception  is relevant  for organizational  leadership  be- 
cause it influences  their decision-making  [ 14 ]. An understanding  
of the perception  of cyber-related  risks at senior decision-making  
levels—including  its perceived  place relative  to other risk manage-  
ment apparatus—can  inform cybersecurity  incident  response.  Sim- 
ulations  are a means to test preparedness  for crises, but also for 
decision-makers  to develop  experiential  learning  [ 15 ]. Within cyber- 
security,  this preparation  can include scenario-based  methods,  which 
bring together  objectives,  scenario  injects, observation  methods,  and 
evaluation  methods  [ 16 ]. 
Related  work 
Hussain  et al. [ 16 ] critically  review an extensive  set of scenario-based  
games and exercises  for cybersecurity.  Using a strict criteria where the 
target participants  are engaged  in decision-making,  they shortlist  to 
under four dozen exercises.  Most of these exercises  focus on highly 
technical  scenarios,  where the risks are described  in terms of digital 
assets and the decision  space ranges over technical  countermeasures.  
Notably,  our intention  to focus on business  risks with senior exec- 
utive participation  from the same organization  remains  unmatched  
across the reviewed  approaches.  
In terms of assessment  of risk perception,  the majority  of such 
exercises  are aimed at a policy audience  where an assessment  of risk 
perception  is within a political  or official governance  framework.  The 
most well known of these is the Cyber 9/12 Strategy  Challenge  [ 17 ] 
where large-scale  cyberattacks  are stipulated  as highly detailed  sce- 
narios ( albeit tabletop),  and participants—drawn  from public pol- 
icy training  schools—are  challenged  to identify  responses  within the 
NATO and EU governance  structures.  Corporate  organizations  are 
not the target audience,  even though the participants  are challenged  
with coordinating  across public and private sectors as part of the re- 
sponse to scenarios.  The exercise  runs over multiple  days organized  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  3 
by the Atlantic  Council  [ 18 ] and Geneva  Centre for Security  Policy 
[ 19 ]. 
Approaches  studying  relevant  decision-making  within corporate  
organizations  amount  to very few. One includes  a simulation  ap- 
proach by Jalali et al. [ 20 ] where a fictional  company  is used as 
a scenario  for group of experienced  and inexperience  cybersecurity  
managers  to plan for proactive  return on investment.  A simulation  
framework  is used to assess investment  decisions  towards  maximiz-  
ing cybersecurity-related  capacity  development  and risk mitigation.  
The participants  come from different  organizations  and also include 
graduate  students.  
Shreeve  et al. [ 1 ] leveraged  a tabletop  role-playing  game themed  
around cyber-physical  systems,  to study the decision-making  pro- 
cesses of participants  from a wide range of backgrounds  within 
organizations  (including  board members,  finance,  and legal). The 
authors  identified  that team diversity  did not necessarily  influence  
how cybersecurity  problems  were faced, and that cybersecurity  spe- 
cialists would tend to favour new technologies  in search of a so- 
lution. In similar work, Shreeve  et al. [ 21 ] conducted  another  ex- 
amination  of table-top  role-playing  dynamics,  focusing  on the role 
of intuition  and experience  in decision-making,  and finding that 
approaches  resembling  the logic of espoused  cyber-risk  manage-  
ment emerge in those players who lack expertise.  Here, we ex- 
plore the perceived  role of different  stakeholders  with a view to 
incident  management  and business  continuity,  which includes  a 
cybersecurity  element,  finding that participants  contrast  unfolding  
cyber-risk  situations  with how they would manage  other forms of 
incidents.  
Through  a survey, Rhee et al. [ 22 ] explore  whether  top-level  man- 
agers exhibit an optimistic  bias towards  their perception  of security  
risks related to their organization.  The authors  found an appreciation  
for the interdependence  between  organizations  and control of risks 
relative  to business  partners  and comparable  companies.  Here, we 
explore  how management  processes  for incidents  with a cybersecu-  
rity element  may act to control and coordinate  response  to emerging  
risks. 
Merrill [ 23 ] proposes  ‘security  fictions’  as a vehicle for using spec- 
ulative design to explore  the identification  of security  threats,  specifi- 
cally with software  developers.  Although  a different  participant  com- 
munity,  there are parallels  with the design of fictional  events around 
specific cybersecurity  threats.  Merrill comments  that ‘threat identifi-  
cation is a socially  situated  practice’,  where here we relate cyberse-  
curity as one of many concerns  in managing  an organisation  and its 
role in society. 
Methodology  
In this section,  we describe  the design of our scenario  exercise,  the dis- 
tinct dimensions  within the scenario  designs,  study protocol,  and a 
summary  description  of the study participants.  We adapt an existing  
methodology  for scenario  design [ 7 ], focusing  here on a broad group 
of executive  decision-makers  with a variety of roles in one large or- 
ganization,  as opposed  to a community  of executive  cybersecurity  
decision-makers  based across multiple  organizations.  
Executive  decision-makers  respond  more naturally  to a descrip-  
tive perspective  on risk [ 24 ], rather than a normative  description  of 
costs and probabilities.  This has been seen elsewhere  within the secu- 
rity domain  [ 25 ]. To explore  risk judgements  at this level of decision-  
making,  we expose participants  to systematically  constructed  scenar- 
ios , which describe  ‘near future’ events (see the ‘Scenario  design for 
executive  cyber-risks’  section).  Risk decisions  at this level involve dimensions  such as ‘uncertainty,  ignorance,  incomplete  knowledge,  
and ambiguity’  [ 24 ], where these aspects inform parameters  in sce- 
nario design (see the ‘Scenario  dimensions’  section).  The scenarios  
are designed  to encapsulate  a complete  description  of the process  of 
risk taking [ 24 ], combining  the Definition,  Attitudes,  and Evaluation  
around pertinent  risks. 
Scenario  design  for executive  cyber-risks  
In designing  the scenarios,  we were mindful  of the need to maintain  
ecological  validity  [ 26 ]. Participants  will understand  that the scenario  
is not real, but to explore  RQ1, efforts were made to develop  scenar- 
ios, which would resonate  with the sector the participating  organiza-  
tion operates  in (in this case, centred  around postal services).  As such, 
the participants  can consider  the scenario  as if it were a real-life  brief 
of an emerging  situation.  
A set of four scenarios  was developed  to act as discrete  progres-  
sions of a potential  incident  involving  a hypothetical  ‘Company  A’, 
as in Tables 1 and 2 . In sequence,  the scenarios  explore  escalation  of 
complexity  and ambiguity,  building  on preceding  scenarios.  
The design of the scenarios  was informed  by the authors’  knowl- 
edge of IT systems  and relevant  cybersecurity  issues for organiza-  
tions, relative  to the sector that the organization  operates  in. A 
knowledgeable  practitioner  with a wealth of experience  at the ex- 
ecutive level also provided  feedback  on the design of the scenarios  
(see the ‘Study protocol’  section);  given the challenges  in finding par- 
ticipants  at this level and optimizing  use of their time, this approach  
was taken instead of a pilot session (as would normally  occur for a 
study involving  human participants).  
The sequence  of scenarios  embody  varying  degrees  of impact.  In 
terms of impact from cyber-risk,  this represents  a general escalation  
from low (S1) to medium  (S2 and S3) to high (S4), as shown in Ta- 
bles 1 and 2 . Scenarios  S2 and S3 are designed  to explore  the space 
between  ‘extremes’  of low and high, as variations  on ‘medium’  sever- 
ity. The escalation  of impacts  and risk, as in Table 3 , is exemplified  as 
a complex  mix of people and systems,  which may be affected  by the 
events possible  within and around each scenario  (given the interact-  
ing elements  of technical  complexity  and uncertainty  within them). 
Scenario  dimensions  
The scenario  dimensions  are adapted  from the work described  in ref. 
[ 7 ], in which the dimensions  were used to elicit views about busi- 
ness risks related to cybersecurity.  We posit that this capability  is ap- 
plicable  also to discussions  with businesses  risk owners who may 
be impacted  by cybersecurity  incidents,  to answer our second re- 
search question  (RQ2). The columns  in Table 3 describe  the dimen- 
sions along which scenarios  are designed,  and the rows show the 
range of elements  which each scenario  is expected  to evoke. Scenario  
dimensions  include:  risk externalities  (including  other stakeholders  
affected)  [ 27 ]; stakeholder  management;  anticipated  risks; areas of 
uncertainty;  technical  areas of complexity,  and; attack classification.  
For each scenario,  Table 3 illustrates  responses  that the authors  an- 
ticipate  for each scenario.  Questions  to participants  prompt  them to 
classify and describe  each scenario  along these dimensions  (as in the 
Appendix).  
Anticipated  risks 
We assess the scenarios  for particular  categories  of business  risk, as 
per the Cambridge  Taxonomy  of Business  Risks [ 28 ]. These risk cat- 
egories embody  a complete  range of risks relevant  to businesses,  as 
follows:  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
4 Parkin et al. 
Ta b l e 1: Scenarios  1 and 2, written as a continuous  narrative  around  an organization  referred  to as ‘Company  A’. 
Scenario  1—‘ransomware’  (Sc-Ransom)  
r The IT Team at Company  A has reported  a possible  ransomware  attack on their enterprise  server, resulting  in the encryption  of the company’s  
central data storage.  This has caused the company’s  accounts  and finance, and human resources  teams to have no access at all to their data.r The IT team have shared a communication  from alleged hackers asking for a ransom of US$500,000  within 3 days from the receipt of the email. 
The hacking  group has threatened  to post out stored credit card details of the company’s  customers  on a public site, if the ransom is not paid. They 
have also threatened  to cause further damage to the company.r The legal team, who have the remit to assure Company  A’s compliance  with GDPR, have been asked to assess what liability is there to Company  A.r The CEO has asked for an immediate  investigation  of the causes (including  practices  and behaviours)  that may have led to this attack. Whether  this 
attack has any other impact is also to be investigated.
Scenario  2—‘control  system malfunction’  (Sc-Pods)  
r Company  A operates  a fleet of autonomous  delivery  pods, supporting  one of the main functions,  it provides  of delivering  post, in a number of cities 
across the country.  This is a relatively  new service that has been operational  only for the past year, and Company  A has rolled out deployment  of the 
technology  across major cities (with well over half of the deliveries  being serviced  using these pods across the four biggest cities).r Three days after the incident  (in Scenario  1), the Fleet Operations  at Company  A has reported  a malfunction  with the Central Control  System (CCS) 
that remotely  manages  the autonomous  delivery  pods in the country’s  capital. The malfunction  has caused much of the pods delivery  network  to 
cease operation,  with a few reports of the pods showing  loss of control and crashing  into other pods, delivery  operators,  and the pod parking bays. 
As a result, three pods have reported  to have been damaged,  and two operators  have been slightly injured. Also, this has led to manual switchover  
of deliveries  in the city, causing severe delays to postal operations.  The manual switchover  has meant relying on delivery  drivers (with shortage  of 
vehicles and drivers to manage)  and delivery  on foot.r The IT Team has confirmed  that the CCS is connected  to the corporate  IT network.  They have confidently  denied any link with the recent 
ransomware  attack. They have asserted  that the central data storage,  which was the main target of the ransomware  attack (in Scenario  1), has no 
link to the CCS even if both are connected  to the corporate  IT network.r The Fleet Operations  have had the suppliers  of the delivery  pods investigate  the malfunction.  The pod supplier  has reported  that they have not 
encountered  such a malfunction  before, and are not ruling out an intentional  malicious  attempt for which Company  A has to take responsibility.  
The suppliers  have argued their technology  is in use all over the world for several years insisting  their technology  is reliable.
The participants  start with Scenario  1, which then escalates  in three subsequent  rounds through Scenarios  2–4 as a series of developments.  We have given the 
scenarios  short-hand  names for reference,  though we did not explicitly  refer to them with these names during the workshop  so as not to influence  interpretation.  
–Financial  risks, such as economic  outlook  and variables,  market 
crisis, trading environments,  business  and competition;  
–Geopolitical  risks, such as national  security,  corruption  & crime, 
government  business  policy, change in government,  political  vio- 
lence, and interstate  conflict;  
–Environmental  risks, such as extreme  weather,  geophysical,  
space, climate change,  environmental  degradation,  natural re- 
source deficiency,  and food security;  
–Social risks, such as socioeconomic  trends, human capital,  brand 
perception,  sustainable  living, health and disease;  
–Governance  risks, such as noncompliance,  litigation,  strategic  
performance,  management  performance,  business  model defi- 
ciencies,  pension  management,  and products  & services;  and 
–Technology  risks, such as targeted  cyberattacks,  critical infras- 
tructure  collapse,  direct and indirect  industrial  accidents,  and the 
inability  to keep up with advances  in technology.  
Attack classification  
An ‘attack classification’  scale was included,  to capture  how par- 
ticipants  regard the severity  of the scenario.  For this measure,  
we adopted  the scale for cyberattack  incident  categorization  pro- 
posed by the UK’s National  Cyber Security  Centre (NCSC)  [ 29 ]. By 
designing—and  in turn, discussing—scenarios  according  to this scale, 
we are able to arrange  scenarios  and structure  engagement  along a 
journey  of increasing  incident  severity  (from S1 through  to S4). The 
scale was shared with participants  before they were presented  with 
the scenarios,  as follows:  
–Category  1 (National  c yber emergenc  y). Causes sustained  disrup- 
tion of essential  services  or affects national  security,  leading to 
severe economic  or social consequences  or to loss of life; 
–Category  2 (Highly  significant  incident).  Has a serious impact on 
central government,  essential  services,  a large proportion  of the 
population,  or the economy;  –Category  3 (Significant  incident).  Has a serious impact on a large 
organization  or on wider / local government,  or which poses a 
considerable  risk to central government  or essential  services;  
–Category  4 (Substantial  incident).  Has a serious impact on a 
medium-sized  organization,  or which poses a considerable  risk 
to a large organization  or wider / local government;  
–Category  5 (Moderate  incident).  Poses considerable  risk to a 
small or medium-sized  organization,  or preliminary  indications  
of cyber activity  against a large organization  or the government;  
–Category  6 (Localized  incident).  Poses considerable  risk to an 
individual,  or preliminary  indications  of cyber activity  against a 
small or medium-sized  organization.  
Complexity  , uncertainty  , and responsibility  
We include open questions  for each scenario,  which prompt  partici- 
pants to identify  where they see notable  areas of complexity  and un- 
certainty.  These elements  of decision-making  have been highlighted  
as being critical at the executive  level [ 24 ]. We also ask participants  
to indicate  the perceived  scope of responsibility  for the incident  on 
a scale that shifts from wholly private sector to state-owned,  with 
a mix at the centre (where this is distinct  from the classification  of 
cybersecurity  incident  as above).  
Study protocol  
An online workshop  was conducted  in May 2021. The entire author 
team, participants,  and the aforementioned  knowledgeable  practi- 
tioner (acting for the most part as an observer)  joined an online video 
conferencing  session.  The time for the entire study was preagreed  
to a defined slot with the participants.  This was a rare opportunity  
where we secured  all the relevant  stakeholders  from the organization  
to come together  and engage in the study in full. 
Before the workshop  event, the authors  confirmed  that consent  
forms had been provided  and returned.  Participants  were also asked Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  5 
Ta b l e 2: Scenarios  3 and 4, following  on from Scenarios  1 and 2. 
Scenario  3—‘power  and connectivity  outage’ (Sc-Power)  
r Four days after the incident  (in Scenario  2), Fleet Operations  at Company  A have now advised the CEO that limited operations  of the delivery  pods 
are ready to commence.  An early joint investigation  with the pods supplier  has led them to assess the system to be safe and ready for operations;  the 
entire system has been bootstrapped  and cleared of any potentially  malfunctioning  components.  Company  A is under severe pressure  to restore 
normal postal service in major cities, and the CEO has approved  recommencing  of delivery  pods.r The very next day, a few hours into the recommencing  of the delivery  service using the pods, has led to another incident.  The CCS has reported  an 
outage of power, with no visibility  or control of the delivery  pods. The IT team has now (internally)  declared  this a potential  cyberattack,  ceasing all 
enterprise  and supporting  IT functions  across the entire network  at Company  A.r A clean up operation  to recover the pods has been launched.  While no incidents  have been reported  from any of the other delivery  routes, there have 
been some media reports suggesting  traffic has been disrupted  in the centre of one of the biggest cities where the pods have steered onto public 
roads. This has led to panic in the central business  districts  in the city, where the incidents  have occurred,  along with early reports of at least one 
fatality from one of the road accidents  due to a pod. Any further disruption  is still being established.r Company  A’s CEO and senior team have convened  on an urgent basis to monitor  the situation.  Both the IT Team and Fleet Operations  are 
investigating  the incident,  in cooperation  with the authorities  in the city. The CEO has announced  ceasing of all operations,  given that all IT 
networks  have been powered  down temporarily.  The CEO is under pressure  from the company  board members  to hold regular internal briefings.
Scenario  4—‘nation–state  disruption’  (Sc-Nation)  
r Following  day, the country’s  national  media is reporting  a nation-wide  cyberattack  on critical infrastructure,  targeting  cellular networks  and road 
traffic management  systems in major urban centres including  the country’s  capital and other major cities. Some transport  infrastructure  (including  
train stations and airports)  that relies on telecommunication  systems around the country has also been affected.  The attack is affecting  power 
supply to many of these digital systems and assets, directly affecting  normal operations.  Stations  and airports  across the country have been put on 
high alert, with many journeys  disrupted  due to cancellations.r The country’s  national  cybersecurity  agency has approached  Company  A with a view to conducting  a forensic  examination  across some of the 
computers,  corporate  network  routers, and control systems interfacing  the pod delivery  system. The agency staff have confirmed  that the impact of 
the attack on Company  A (in Scenario  3) is highly likely to be a source of national  disruption;  exact details on how the attack propagated  from 
Company  A to cellular networks  and other national  systems is not known however.r More details on the national  cyberattack  have been released  by the media, which point to a vulnerability  in the autonomous  delivery  pods, supplied  
by the same supplier  to Company  A. The vulnerability  affects the communication  and control protocols  provided  by the supplier  to allow for 
remote teleoperation  of the pods. Some of the news reports have even pointed a finger to the attack (in Scenario  3) that targeted  Company  A, calling 
it the ‘clear source of the attack’. The attack is being attributed  to a neighbouring  country,  which has long been an aggressor  to its neighbours.  
While none of this information  has been confirmed  by the authorities,  this has raised major concerns  amongst  the top leadership  of Company  A.r The Board of Directors  of Company  A are now wanting  more details from the IT and Fleet Operations.  Some of the Directors  are wanting  to issue a 
press release to assure the wider public. All postal operations  have been switched  to manual operations  across the country,  even from other postal 
delivery  companies  as caution.  This has meant a significant  effect on postal and logistics  nationally,  directly affecting  the economy.
to complete  a presurvey,  which included  questions  to capture  their 
existing  risk focus (using the Cambridge  Risk Taxonomy).  
At the start of the event, there was an introduction  session last- 
ing 30 minutes,  by the researcher–authors,  participants,  and the ob- 
server. This was especially  important  given the online format (using a 
secured  Zoom meeting),  where we allowed  participants  to keep their 
cameras  off if they wished.  Introductions  allowed  us to become  fa- 
miliar with who was in the meeting,  principally  to be able to associate  
comments  to a specific participant  when they spoke. One researcher  
then provided  an overview  of the research,  and demonstrated  com- 
pletion of a ‘dummy’  survey form. 
The four rounds of scenario  were each 30 minutes  in duration:  
this time allowed  participants  to read each scenario  once revealed  
(and kept on-screen)  as in Tables 1 and 2 , to clarify any content,  
which was unclear,  and to then complete  the survey form (as in the 
Appendix).  After reading  each scenario,  the participants  were asked 
to complete  a survey response  sheet provided  online (see the Ap- 
pendix for details of these questions).  This window  of time was also 
designed  to be generous  enough  as to allow for open discussion  of 
the scenario  before moving  to the next one. Pertinent  participant  
comments  from those discussions  were noted by a dedicated  note- 
taker, where these are included  to interpret  the results from the survey 
forms as in the next section.  
A break was incorporated  into the schedule  after the first two 
scenarios,  lasting 15 minutes.  If any participants  needed to ‘leave’ the 
workshop  while there was still time in each scenario  block, they were 
able to do so. After the four scenario  blocks, there was a 30-minute  debrief and discussion  section,  which included  overview  comments  
from the observer  (who although  external  to the participating  orga- 
nization,  was familiar  with them). The workshop  lasted 3 hours and 
15 minutes,  and was attended  fully by all participants.  
The observer  was present during the workshop  in the sense of be- 
ing on the entire online meeting,  and making  their presence  known 
at intervals.  This was in part to assure the participants  and main- 
tain an environment  of trust. In cooperation  with the researchers,  
the observer  kept comments  to a minimum  during the workshop,  so 
as not to either (i) influence  participants’  own views, or (ii) disturb 
the discourse  between  the authors  and the participants.  The observer  
was experienced  and knowledgeable  in their right, so their input was 
sought as a closing overview  at the end of the debrief.  At the end of 
the workshop,  the researchers  thanked  the participants  for their time 
and closed the event. 
Participants  
Study participants  were recruited  from the same organization,  bro- 
kered by the trusted intermediary  and observer  (who also attended  
the workshop  event as an observer).  Participants  represent  stakehold-  
ers in the organization  responsible  for decision-making  around cyber- 
security  (and were invited on this basis); this did not include anyone 
outside of the executive  function  responsible  for implementing  any 
decisions  (e.g. IT staff). 
As a group, the participants  held executive  roles in the organiza-  
tion, many of these relating  to business  continuity,  compliance,  gover- Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
6 Parkin et al. 
Ta b l e 3: Scenario  dimensions,  or characterizations  in each scenario.  
Characterization  S1 / Sc-Ransom  S2 / Sc-Pods S3 / Sc-Power  S4 / Sc-Nation  
Risk externalities  (in 
terms of who and 
what is directly and 
evidently  affected  
beyond the IT Team) Who? 
r Customers  r Staff 
What? 
r Customer  credit card 
information  r Access to company  
data Who? 
r Customers  r Staff (Fleet 
Operators)  
What? 
r Postal Delivery  r Staff well-being  r Delivery  pods r Delivery  service Who? 
r Customers  r Company  staff 
(including  Fleet 
Operators)  r Public (road users) 
What? 
r Postal delivery  r Life r Delivery  pods r Access to IT and digital 
services r Road traffic disruption  Who? 
r Customers  r Company  staff r Wider public r Infrastructure  owners and operators  
What? 
r Public life r Postal delivery  r Postal services r Telecommunication  services r Public transport  r Electricity  supply 
Stakeholder  
management  (internal  
/ external)  r Management  r Staff r Legal team r Customers  r GDPR regulator  r Management  r Staff (including  Fleet 
Operations)  r Pod supplier  r Legal team r Management  r Staff (all) r Law enforcement  
(traffic) r Public (loss of life) r Legal team r Management  r Staff (all) r National  government  r CNI operators  r Public (PR) r Legal team 
Anticipated  risks (in 
terms of Cambridge  
Business  Risks 
(family/class)  (number  
of risk families 
exposed)  r Technology/  cyber/ 
cloud outage r Technology/  cyber/ 
data exfiltration  r Governance  / 
noncompliance  / 
negligence  r Social/brand  
perception  / negative  
customer  experience  r Technology/  cyber/ 
Internet  of Things r Technology/  
disruptive  
technology/  robotics  
& automation  r Governance  / 
noncompliance  / 
occupational  health 
& safety r Governance/  
products  and 
services/  innovation  
(R&D) failure r Financial/  
counterparty/  
supplier  failure r Technology/  cyber/ 
Internet  of Things r Technology/  disruptive  
technology/  robotics  & 
automation  r Governance/  
noncompliance/  
negligence  r Governance/  
litigation/private  lawsuit r Social/brand  perception/  
negative  media coverage  r Financial  / counterparty/  
supplier  failure r Technology/  cyber/ Internet  of Things r Technology/disruptive  
technology/robotics  & automation  r Technology/  critical infrastructure  / 
transport  r Technology/  critical infrastructure  / 
power r Technology/  critical infrastructure  / 
telecommunications  r Governance  / noncompliance  / 
negligence  r Governance  / litigation  r Social/brand  perception  / negative  media 
coverage  r Geopolitical/interstate  conflict / 
asymmetric  warfare r Financial  / counterparty/supplier  failure 
Uncertainty  factors r Source and cause of 
attack r Wider impact of the 
attack (subject to 
recoverability),  and 
any ‘further damage’  
that could be caused r Nature of liability to 
the organization  r Malfunction  or link 
to the ransomware  
attack r Nature of delays to 
postal operations  r Level of trust in the 
pod supply chain r Nature of assessment  
conducted  to 
reintroduce  pods r Cause of power outage r Nature of physical  
disruption  caused by the 
incident  in the city r Involvement  of a nation state r Link between  attack on Company  A and 
national  disruption  (and extent of such 
disruption)  r Content  of press release 
Responsibility  5 5 3 1 
Att. class. 5 (Moderate  incident)  3 (Significant  incident)  3 (Significant  incident)  1 (National  cyber emergency)  
The characterizations  represent  a mix of elements  designed  into each scenario,  and anticipated  responses,  which would be within expectations  when engaging  with 
participants.  
nance, and security  (Q1 in the presurvey).  All participants  had over 
10 years of work experience,  with most (67%) having between  21 
and 30 years and one having between  41 and 50 years (Q2). 
By capturing  information  about Direct Reports,  we were able to 
infer that many of the participants  in this group work together  di- 
rectly; some reported  to others in the group. This may have influenced  
the discussions  (where we saw a few, perhaps  more senior individu-  
als leading the discussion,  such as PInc1 and PGov5).  This was an 
important  artefact  of the engagement,  potentially  emulating  a real decision-making  hierarchy  (among  executives)  in most large organi- 
zations such as this one. 
With respect to the summary  given by participants  of what IT- 
related decision-making  they carry out in their role, replies included  
mention  of cybersecurity  awareness,  business  continuity,  compliance,  
and incident  management  (Q4). Broadly,  PInc1 was responsible  for 
cyber-incident  handling  and PInc2 with incident  response;  PCon6,  
PCon8,  and PCon9 are involved  in business  continuity;  PGov4,  
PGov5,  and PGov7 with compliance  and governance  and PGov3 with Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  7 
Figure 1: Top perceived  cybersecurity  risk categories,  from the preworkshop  survey (1 highest, 6 lowest). The x-axis indicates  the total number of participants  
who have included  each category  in their ranking. 
security  awareness.  Some of the action verbs commonly  used in their 
summary  include:  ‘Define’,  ‘check/verify’,  ‘manage/handle/monitor’,  
and ‘execute’.  These may speak to the responsibility  of ensuring  
smooth  running  of existing  security  and business  continuity  frame- 
works. 
Although  not strictly a participant,  the observer  has knowledge  
of the participating  organization.  With over 40 years of experience  in 
governance  of technology-related  risks, the observer  provided  a cred- 
ible source of reflection  at the end of the exercise,  arguably  beyond  
that which the authors  could glean from existing  research.  The pres- 
ence of the observer  served as a bridge between  research  imperatives  
and respecting  corporate  access. 
Ethics  
The study was approved  as part of institutional  human-facing  re- 
search review. This includes  satisfying  ethical obligations  ensuring  
participatory  consent,  due governance  of data collection  (including  
storage,  processing,  sharing,  and deletion  in compliance  with GDPR),  
digital needs met through  secure infrastructure,  and following  dis- 
tancing  protocols  due to COVID-19.  
We also addressed  the principles  of the Menlo Report [ 30 ] for eth- 
ical research  in ICT. We did not ask directly  for sensitive  operational  
details, and were considerate  of the fact that multiple  people from the 
same organization  were attending  the workshop,  encouraging  partic- 
ipation where possible  while respecting  organizational  dynamics.  We 
also ensured  no hindrance  of fair representation  of diversity  (in terms 
of age, disability,  race, gender, religion,  sexual identity)  amongst  the 
participants.  
We recognized  the busy schedules  and ‘poor reachability’  [ 11 ] of 
highly experienced  professionals  such as our participants:  questions  
were designed  to facilitate  short answers,  and participation  was vol- 
untary. The participants  were not compensated  financially;  after the 
workshop,  all participants  were provided  with a high-level  summary  
report of results and reflections,  which emerged  from the event. 
Results  
All of the named authors  facilitated  the workshop  with participants,  
with two authors  speaking  to cue participants  to read scenario  de- 
scriptions,  complete  per-scenario  surveys,  and to also prompt  and 
lead discussion.  Here, we discuss participant  responses  to the scenar- 
ios in initial subsections,  as recorded  in survey answers,  and as also derived  from written notes of the workshop  (as in the ‘Uncertainty  
and technical  complexity’  section).  We refer to Scenarios  1–4 as S1, 
S2, S3, and S4, respectively.  We note here also that P4 did not com- 
plete the forms for S3 and S4. 
Prescenario  risk ranking  
We saw—as  in Fig. 1 —that not all of the six categories  were ranked 
by the participant  group. Rankings  also differed  and were varied: no 
category  was left not selected  and all but Environmental  and Geopo-  
litical were ranked first by at least one participant.  Technology  was 
prioritized  the most, receiving  the greatest  number  of first place rank- 
ings, the most selections,  and no selections  lower than third place 
ranking.  Social received  the most varied ranking  selections,  followed  
by Governance  and then Financial.  
We also revisit the broad categories  of participant  backgrounds  
as detailed  earlier: incident  response  (PInc1, PInc2), governance  
(PGov3,  PGov4,  PGov5,  PGov7),  and business  continuity  (PCon6,  
PCon8,  and PCon9).  The ‘incident  response’  (PInc#) group priori- 
tized Finance  as their top risk where other groups did not; the ‘gover- 
nance’ (PGov#)  group listed Technology  as either their first or second 
priority  area of cybersecurity-related  risk; alongside  this, the ‘busi- 
ness continuity’  (PCon#)  group was more mixed in their rankings.  
Attack  categorization  and risk ownership  
Attack categorizations  are shown in Table 4 . No participants  re- 
garded any of the scenarios  as being in categories  5–6, likely as these 
refer to smaller organizations  (which does not apply to this one par- 
ticipating  organization).  Participants  generally  saw Sc-Pods  as hav- 
ing a more localized  impact than Sc-Ransom,  even though the ‘phys- 
ical’ impact of the scenario  events was outside of the organization  
in public spaces (where more participants  noted Social and Environ-  
mental risks for Sc-Pods  than in Sc-Ransom);  this potentially  hints at 
a distinction  between  escalating  cyber-risks  and how escalations  in 
noncyber-risks  are assessed.  
Also, in Fig. 2 , Sc-Power  and Sc-Nation  were given almost an 
identical  classification,  even though the context  shifted with S3 to 
S4 from impacts  to national  postal services  to potential  nation-level  
cyberattacks.  
When discussing  Sc-Ransom  after completing  the survey, par- 
ticipants  noted Company  A’s role in critical infrastructure,  with a 
nation-wide  customer  base—the  business  and potential  reputational  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
8 Parkin et al. 
Ta b l e 4: Number  of selections  by participants  of each attack category  (C#). 
Scenario  Scen. category  C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 
S1 C5 – 4 3 2 – –
S2 C3 2 1 1 5 – –
S3 C3 7 – 1 – – –
S4 C1 7 1 – – – –
Columns  represent  the six ‘attack classification’  categories,  category  1 for a much more severe, national cyber emergency,  and category  6 for a localized  or emergent  
incident.  Rows show category  selections  for each scenario.  
Figure 2: Tally of participant  perception  of the responsibility  of the organization  (‘private  sector’) against that of the state in managing  the risks in each scenario  
(S1–S4).  The y-axis indicates  number of participants  who have selected  each of the values 1 (‘State’) to 5 (‘Private  Sector’).  
impact was seen as critical compared  to the ransomware  amount,  
if Company  A is seen as a ‘safe harbour’  (PGov5)  for (financial)  ser- 
vices, for instance.  P5 also noted potential  legal / data protection  ram- 
ifications,  and P7 the revenue  loss from disrupted  services  (as relates 
to the higher ranking  of Financial).  Participants  generally  pointed  to 
the need to coordinate  with national  authorities  (an element  of Gov- 
ernance),  where the risk ‘extends  beyond the organization’  (PGov7).  
Sc-Pods:  was seen as affecting  a limited portion  of the organi- 
zation (PInc1),  with options  to switch to manual/non-IT  activities  
(PGov3).  However,  there was also consideration  of a potential  loss of 
life (PGov4)  though this was limited to injuries  (P5). Delays in larger 
cities (PGov5)  account  for Environmental  and Social impact,  with 
operational  risks relating  to damage  to businesses  and to employ-  
ees (PGov7).  The impact on a new business  service was also noted 
(PGov5,  PCon8).  
Sc-Power:  although  the risk category  selections  are comparable  
to those for Sc-Pods,  the attack categorization  switches  from more 
of a business-focused  issue in Sc-Pods,  to S3 being regarded  by our 
participants  as a nation-level  incident.  Participants  focused  on the 
‘loss of life’ (PGov3),  and that the incident  occurred  in a major city 
(PCon6).  PGov7 noted that ‘The incident  is not yet certain,  but the 
impact for Company  A is certain’  , noting the social impact,  that the 
reputation  for Company  A and the technology  has been damaged.  
Different  forms of certainty  in cybersecurity  decisions  are noted else- 
where [ 31 ]. 
Regarding  Sc-Nation,  participants  noted a clear national  secu- 
rity angle (PCon8),  affecting  mobile communication  (PGov5),  trans- portation  (PCon9),  and ‘high potential  for economic  and social dis- 
ruption’  (PGov7).  
Participants  were asked to indicate  their perception  of the 
private–public  mix of responsibility  for ownership  of risks seen in 
each scenario  (Fig. 2 ), on a scale of 5 (Private  sector) to 1 (Public / 
State). Values around the centre of the scale indicate  shared respon-  
sibility. What is interesting  then is that there is a jump from S1 to 
S3 (Sc-Ransom,  Sc-Pods,  and Sc-Power,  respectively,  being within the 
private sector, to Sc-Ransom  being seen by all participants  as includ- 
ing some responsibility  for the state—this  reflects the nature of the 
scenario  themes.  Otherwise,  participants  clustered  their perceptions  
of responsibility  around the private sector / Company  A itself. Par- 
ticipants  classified  the responsibility  for Sc-Pods  and Sc-Power  as in 
the same region as for Sc-Ransom,  even while rating Sc-Pods  and Sc- 
Power as higher types of attack categorization—in  discussion,  partic- 
ipants made a distinction  between  managing  potential  incidents  and 
keeping  other stakeholders  appraised  of them, where the discussion  
switched  around Sc-Nation  to being involved  at a nation-level.  
Scenario  risk categorization  
For each scenario,  participants  selected  a smaller set of risks than was 
available  (Figs 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6 , for scenarios  S1–S4, respectively).  For 
the first two scenarios,  no participants  selected  more than four risk 
categories,  reflecting  the comparative  simplicity  of these scenarios.  
The selections  for Sc-Ransom  (S1) are in line with the theme of 
the scenario,  with ‘Technology’  and ‘Financial’  risks being selected  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  9 
Figure 3: Business  risk category  rankings  by no. of participants,  for scenarios  S1 (1 highest, 6 lowest). The x-axis indicates  the total number of participants  who 
have included  each category  in their ranking. The legend describes  the ranking position (from first to sixth, 1 to 6, respectively).  Each distinct block for each of 
the risk types then represents  how many participants  selected  a particular  ranking. As an example,  two participants  ranked ‘Social’ risks first for this scenario.  
Figure 4: Business  risk category  rankings  by no. of participants,  for scenarios  S2 (1 highest, 6 lowest). The x-axis indicates  the total number of participants  who 
have included  each category  in their ranking. The legend describes  the ranking position (from first to sixth, 1 to 6, respectively).  Each distinct block for each of 
the risk types then represents  how many participants  selected  a particular  ranking. As an example,  two participants  ranked ‘Governance’  risks second for this 
scenario,  and none ranked it as first. 
most. The role of ‘Social’ risks grew, and ‘Financial’  risks reduced,  
with Sc-Pods  (S2) and Sc-Power  (S3), reflecting  their impacts  outside 
of the fictional  company.  ‘Geopolitical’  risks did not feature at all for 
the first three scenarios,  but then featured  heavily in Sc-Nation  (S4), 
within expectations.  
At the end of each round, participants  were asked to comment  
on the scenarios.  We report on our findings  along with some of the 
related areas addressed  in an open discussion  that followed  each sce- 
nario assessment.  
Scenario  1 (Sc-Ransom)  
The response  noted the due reporting  requirements  that regimes  such 
as GDPR mandate.  This affirmed  an understanding  of such regulated  
areas of data and technology.  Any such reporting  needs to acknowl-  
edge associated  uncertainties  that come with such incidents.  Indeed PGov4 acknowledged  this explicitly,  while PGov7 also emphasized  
on the need for a ‘very prompt  assessment  of what data has been af- 
fected’ , noting both the extent of data impacted  and the timeliness  of 
this assessment.  
Scenario  2 (Sc-Pods)  
The health and safety of the employees  was a key concern  raised given 
some of the employees  are injured due to delivery  pod malfunction.  
This was linked to potentially  a number  of risks that may emerge in 
terms of financial  loss, legal action by the regulator,  and ultimately  
governance  risks given possible  loss of confidence  amongst  employ-  
ees (PGov4).  
Pertinent  to autonomous  pods, a key risk noted by PGov7 was 
the incident  leading to a reduction  in ‘the confidence  in a new tech- 
nology’  . This is often an underplayed  area of impact arising out of Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
10 Parkin et al. 
Figure 5: Business  risk category  rankings  by no. of participants,  for scenarios  S3 (1 highest, 6 lowest). The x-axis indicates  the total number of participants  who 
have included  each category  in their ranking. The legend describes  the ranking position (from first to sixth, 1 to 6, respectively).  Each distinct block for each of 
the risk types then represents  how many participants  selected  a particular  ranking. As an example,  two participants  ranked ‘Social’ risks second for this 
scenario,  and none ranked it as first. 
Figure 6: Business  risk category  rankings  by no. of participants,  for scenarios  S4 (1 highest, 6 lowest). The x-axis indicates  the total number of participants  who 
have included  each category  in their ranking. The legend describes  the ranking position (from first to sixth, 1 to 6, respectively).  Each distinct block for each of 
the risk types then represents  how many participants  selected  a particular  ranking. As an example,  one participant  ranked ‘Governance’  risks as first for this 
scenario,  one ranked it as fourth, and three ranked it as fifth in terms of criticality.  
cyberattacks  that are now seen to be targeting  a number  of technol-  
ogy that are only emerging.  
Scenario  3 (Sc-Po w er) 
The severity  of the incident  given the loss of life becomes  centre of the 
attention  now. PGov5 confirms  this as to say that they classified  the 
event as a level one concern  ‘because  of the fatality that occurred’  , 
and also noting that in a case such as this ‘we have to report to the 
local authority  [...] and also report to the central g ov ernment’  . PGov7 
goes as far as to say that also perhaps  ‘Parliament  would require a 
question  time with the CEO’. 
The focus on the role of the top level organizational  leadership  is 
becoming  clear now, not only in terms of they have to do but how 
they ought to be supported,  as PGov5 notes ‘after taking this advice from the specialist  departments,  [...] we need all of these specialist  
divisions  to be very close to each other to support  [the CEO]’.  This 
serves to confirm  the underlying  premise  of this research  that ex- 
ecutive leadership  in organizations  are increasingly  challenged  with 
managing  cyber-risks,  as an important  part of wider business  risk 
management.  Acknowledging  that such risks are complex,  our par- 
ticipants  appear to be confirming  the role the leadership  plays and 
the support  they need. 
Scenario  4 (Sc-Nation)  
As cyberattacks  become  major incidents,  targeting  critical infrastruc-  
ture and disrupting  public life in a substantial  way, the risk ownership  
shifts, as we see in Fig. 2 . PGov5 captures  this clearly when they say 
that for Sc-Nation  ‘the classification  is not so uncertain’  , but that in Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  11 
this case ‘the line of responsibility  is not clear yet’ , though ‘the state 
is now much more heavily inv olv ed in the management  of this situa- 
tion’ . This exemplifies  management  of different  forms of uncertainty  
at once [ 31 ]. PGov5 focuses further on senior leadership,  in that ‘the 
board wants to show that it is actively  involved  and that is in charge 
[...] it is trying to manage  the problem,  of course, to inv estig ate it to 
find the root causes and to solve them’. 
Uncertainty  and technical  complexity  
Our scenarios  presented  growing  uncertainty  and technical  complex-  
ity as they captured  an escalating  cyberattack.  
Uncertainty  
Key themes emerging  around uncertainty  are external  stakeholders  
(which may hold varying  levels of relationship  with the organization)  
and impact (as causal links and propagation  may not be straightfor-  
ward). These may be regarded  as a mix of unknown  and unknowable  
cybersecurity  uncertainties  [ 31 ]. 
For Sc-Ransom,  PGov7 mentioned  the capability  to recover  data 
as being uncertain.  PCon8 noted that it may not be clear at this point 
how to resume services.  
Around  Sc-Pods,  there was perceived  uncertainty  around how 
the events would be interpreted  by employees  (PGov4),  as it could 
affect their confidence  in being able to work. The reliability  in 
the declaration  by the pod manufacturer  was also mentioned  
(PCon9),  indicating  that external  communications  are useful for 
dependent  stakeholders  to make their own internal  assessment  of 
risks. 
Regarding  Sc-Power,  PGov7 noted the main source of uncertainty  
as determining  whether  the information  on the fatality and traffic 
disruption  is accurate.  With Sc-Nation,  a concern—again  raised by 
PGov7—was  determining  whether  the vulnerability  in Company  A 
facilitated  the events in this scenario.  These discussions  follow a pat- 
tern of ‘sequential’  (or ‘joined-up’)  thinking  [ 31 ]. 
Tec hnological  comple xity 
Technological  complexity  is also a factor towards  uncertainty  when 
it comes to establishing  causal impact and the full implications  of 
attacks.  
For Sc-Ransom,  PGov4 raised the question  of how we assess the 
infrastructure  impacted,  because  vulnerability  assessment  and pen- 
etration  tests are time-consuming.  Somewhat  related was how did 
the attack manifest  itself and whether  there could be further similar 
attacks were also questions  raised by PGov7 and PCon9.  
Across S2–S4 (Sc-Pods,  Sc-Power,  and Sc-Nation,  respectively),  
participants  have similar reactions  raising questions  that typically  
arise out of post-mortems  of cyberattacks.  Attempting  to link the 
ransomware  to attacks that followed,  PGov3,  PGov4,  and PCon9 
wanted  to understand  the causal link due to the underlying  technical  
architecture;  PGov7 raises this in the context  of such attacks impact-  
ing national  infrastructure.  
The use of autonomous  pods in the scenarios  was deliberate  to 
assess the response  against an emerging  IoT technology.  Only one of 
the participants  (PGov7  in Sc-Power)  noted the potentially  complex  
technology  underpinning  the pods. 
Discussion  
Here, we reflect on both the design of the scenarios  and the responses  
of participants  to the scenarios.  In terms of the methodology  (RQ1), 
our use of existing  categories  of cybersecurity  incident  severity  [ 29 ] and business  risk [ 28 ] guided not only the design of scenarios,  but 
also provided  structure  to scenario  escalation.  These categorizations  
informed  the injection  of narrative  hints around associated  risks and 
externalities,  relevant  stakeholders,  and issues of complexity.  Our fo- 
cus on risk perception  and ownership  is an acknowledgement  that at 
an executive  level decisions  are directed  at strategy  and resource  man- 
agement,  where organizational  resources  can be deployed  to over- 
come risks posed to the organization,  and state resources  can be in- 
voked where the risk moves on to the wider sphere (that is, to the 
public and national  infrastructure).  
Regarding  RQ2, our findings  show that risks were generally  se- 
lected within the parameters/expectations  in our scenario  design (Ta- 
ble 3 ), though participants  noted that local and national  governments  
would be contacted  as soon as public spaces were affected  (as in Sc- 
Pods and Sc-Power,  and not only Sc-Nation),  where attribution  of 
incidents  is a critical deliberation  that is distinct  from communica-  
tion of information  about such incidents  [ 32 ]. Further,  incident  task 
forces would be called into action when the incident  was regarded  
as having become  very serious and seen as involving  multiple  inter- 
nal and external  stakeholders  (as with S3 and S4); such crisis teams 
involve bringing  together  members  of an organization  with the skills 
seen as necessary  to improvise  a response  to an incident  [ 33 ], such 
that here convening  such a team or committee  was seen as an existing  
approach  that was equally applicable  to cybersecurity  incidents  (as 
noted elsewhere  [ 34 ]). 
The workshop  observer  provided  overview  comments  after the 
discussion  session.  They noted that there needs to be a communica-  
tion plan for engaging  with the media, where this can require care- 
ful planning  [ 35 ]. The observer  also commented  that in increasingly  
complex  scenarios  (noting this particularly  for S3), to manage  the 
crisis, there would be a need to understand  the causal links between  
events (which further points to the importance  of attribution  in cyber- 
related incidents  [ 32 ]), where this would typically  mean calling on ex- 
ternal cybersecurity  specialists  to conduct  an independent  review. The 
observer  also indicated  that it would be useful to relate risk categories  
to metrics,  in the sense of specific actions being activated  depending  
on specific outcomes,  e.g. if there was loss of life or significant  loss of 
money, that it would define the extent to which different  levels of cri- 
sis committee  would meet. PGov7 responded  to this, indicating  that 
existing  crisis committee  procedures  would apply well to the events 
described  in our scenarios  (so not necessarily  requiring  a dedicated  
‘cyber’ crisis committee),  as they have an organizational  perspective  
and define who is involved  in which kinds of crisis. 
Our approach  could be taken to other sectors where the key as- 
pects that would need adapting  would be the scenarios,  to ensure 
thematic  relevance  to the target audience,  and the risk categoriza-  
tion, particularly  if the target organization  is other than private sector 
(given our choice of the business  risk taxonomy).  Public sector orga- 
nizations,  e.g. would have different  governance  structures  to manage  
resources.  Where participating  organizations  are in the same sector 
or use similar technologies,  a ‘bank’ of scenarios  and scenario  com- 
ponents  (as described  in our scenario  design (Table 3 ) can be con- 
structed  over successive  engagements,  providing  potential  to mean- 
ingfully  compare  participating  organizations.  
The design of the approach  described  here provides  options  for 
participants,  to fit their views into predetermined  scales and cate- 
gories; this has served well to determine  if participants  perceive  dif- 
ferences  between  scenarios  as they change and escalate  according  
to the dimensions  we have integrated  into each scenario.  In future, 
the methodology  could be adapted  to prioritize  explanatory  mech- 
anisms in the workshop  protocol—this  could include providing  our 
scenario  classifications  to participants  and asking them to reason as Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
12 Parkin et al. 
to whether  our classifications  fit with their perceptions,  or why they 
do not. 
Limitations  
Not all participants  engaged  with the data-collection  forms for each 
scenario,  as at least one participant  needed to move location  between  
scenario  sessions—this  was determined  in advance  and accounted  
for as best as possible  in the workshop  (the researchers  established  
availability  beforehand,  accepting  that the participants  were mak- 
ing a best-effort  to make themselves  available  all at the same time). 
Although  form completion  was not total, most participants  did com- 
plete the forms consistently  for each scenario,  and all participants  
completed  the preworkshop  form. Senior managers  in organizations  
are a hard-to-reach  population,  where studies with senior managers  
should also aim where possible  to respect the participants’  availabil-  
ity in terms of both attention  and time. 
Another  limitation  is that the more senior participants  drove 
much of the open discussion.  The dynamics  of working  culture were 
considered  as an eventuality  during the design of the workshop;  
hence, the moment  designed  in for each participant  to complete  the 
per-scenario  forms individually  before discussion,  as a means to guar- 
antee input from everyone  involved.  
Ideally, we would have conducted  the exercise  in-person.  The par- 
ticipants  were recruited  as a group—coming  to this group without  a 
prior context,  we did not know the interpersonal  dynamics.  Also, 
because  the workshop  was conducted  virtually,  we had little insight-  
ful interaction  and cues typical to face-to-face  interactions,  including  
any incidental  interactions  such as a person appearing  engaged  or 
confused  by anything  they are reading.  We aimed to compensate  for 
this with the use of the preworkshop  survey to gather some context,  
and the preparatory  meeting  with the intermediary/observer.  We also 
note that participants  engaged  with the survey forms and discussion  
throughout  the workshop.  
Conclusion  and future  work 
When reflecting  on the scenario-based  approach,  it was noted, for 
instance  by P5, that the escalation  of scenarios  resulted  in a shift of 
decision-making  around risk ownership;  P5 further remarked  that 
the last scenario  was akin to getting ‘to the end of the story’ , and 
that at different  stages of progression  there would be a different  view 
of (risk) ownership.  This is similar to what Shreeve  et al. frame as 
‘complex  thinking’  in decisions,  which returns to earlier assumptions  
[ 31 ]. Future work will explore  the potential  for the sequence  of sce- 
nario variations  to more explicitly  represent  an evolving  situation  
and shifts in perceived  risks, perhaps  as one scenario  with varying  
aspects of uncertainty,  and the decisions,  which participants  make in 
response.  
There are initiatives  to build capacity  in organizations  and soci- 
ety to be prepared  for broad categories  of large-scale  risks [ 6 ]—these  
efforts extend to cybersecurity.  Regarding  ‘practices  for prepared-  
ness’, businesses  would then prepare  themselves  to address  such chal- 
lenges by addressing  three key capabilities:  resilience-by-design,  re- 
sponsibility,  and exercise.  We have explored  the last of these through  
scenario-driven  discussion  of preparedness.  Discussions  also touched  
on decision-making  related to responsibility,  and clarity of risk own- 
ership . Future work will also include exploration  of how scenarios  
can be used to improve  existing  preparedness  for incidents  with a cy- 
bersecurity  element  (where preparedness  for situations  focused  on cy- 
bersecurity  has been explored  elsewhere  [ 31 ], and here, we consider  
how decision-making  would be impacted  by complex  and uncertain  situations).  For instance,  pre-prepared  playbooks  may be practised  
to respond  to specific scenarios  (e.g. connected  places [ 36 ]), where 
an approach  such as ours is an opportunity  to develop  and rehearse  
responses  to incidents.  
Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to acknowledge  the participants  from the partner or- 
ganization  and Richard Knowlton  who served as the workshop  observer.  
Author  contributions  
Simon Parkin (Conceptualization  [equal], Investigation  [equal], Methodology  
[equal], Visualization  [equal], Writing –original  draft [equal], Writing –review 
& editing [equal]),  Kristen Kuhn (Conceptualization  [equal], Data curation  
[equal], Investigation  [equal], Methodology  [equal], Writing – original  draft 
[equal]),  and Siraj Ahmed Shaikh (Conceptualization  [equal], Funding acqui- 
sition [equal], Investigation  [equal], Methodology  [equal], Project administra-  
tion [equal], Writing – original  [equal], Writing – review  & editing [equal]) 
Conflict of interest statement.  None declared.  
References  
1.Shreeve B, Hallett J, Edwards  M,. et al. The best laid plans or lack 
thereof: security decision-making  of different  stakeholder  groups. IEEE 
Trans Softw Eng 2020; 48 :1515–28.
2.National  Cyber Security Centre . Cyber security toolkit for boards 2019. 
2019. Available  from https:// www.ncsc.gov.uk/  collection/board-toolkit  
(11 August 2023, date last accessed).
3.Greenberg  A. The untold story of NotPetya,  the most devastating  cy- 
berattack  in history. 2018. Available  from https:// www.wired.com/  stor 
y/notpetya-  cyberattack-  ukraine-  russia- code- crashed-  the- world/(11 Au- 
gust 2023, date last accessed).
4.Fiveash K. The Norsk Hydro cyber attack is about money, not war. 
2019. Available  from https:// www.wired.co.uk/  article/ norsk- hydro- cybe 
r-attack (11 August 2023, date last accessed).
5.Fiveash BBC. Colonial  pipeline:  US recovers most of ransom, justice de- 
partment  says. 2021. https:// www.bbc.com/  news/business-57394041  (11 
August 2023, date last accessed).
6.Royal Academy  of Engineering  (UK) . Critical capabilities:  strengthening  
UK resilience.  2021. https:// raeng.org.uk/media/bm2e4chu/  raeng-critical  
-capabilities.pdf (11 August 2023, date last accessed).
7.Parkin S, Kuhn K, Shaikh SA. Scenario-Driven  Assessment  of Cyber Risk 
Perception  at the Security Executive  Level. In: Workshop  on Usable Secu- 
rity and Privacy (USEC ‘21) . 2021.
8.T Stevens, A Ertan, K Floyd ,. et al. (eds.). Cyber Threats and NATO 
2030: Horizon  Scanning  and Analysis.  NATO Cooperative  Cyber Defence 
Centre of Excellence,  2021.
9.Moore T, Dynes S, Chang FR. Identifying  how firms manage cyberse- 
curity investment.  Workshop  on the Economics  of Information  Security 
(WEIS) . 2016.
10.Parkin S, Van Moorsel  A, Inglesant  P,. et al. A stealth approach  to usable 
security:  helping IT security managers  to identify workable  security so- 
lutions. In: Proceedings  of the 2010 New Security Paradigms  Workshop  . 
Massachusetts:  ACM, p. 33–50, 2010.
11.Reinfelder  L, Landwirth  R, Benenson  Z. Security managers  are not the 
enemy either. In: Proceedings  of the 2019 CHI Conference  on Human 
Factors in Computing  Systems . New York: A CM, 2019, p. 1–7. 
12.Horne R, Governing  cyber security risk: it’s time to take it seriously:  Seven 
principles  for Boards and Investors.  2017. https:// www.pwc.co.uk/  cyber- 
security/assets/governing-  cyber- security-  risk.pdf (11 August 2023, date 
last accessed).
13.Nordberg  D, Booth R. Evaluating  the effectiveness  of corporate  boards. 
Corp Gov 2019; 19 :372–87.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
Executi  ve decision-mak  er s: a scenario-based  approach  13 
14.Massie R. Allocating  effort: risk and complexity  in board directors’  en- 
gagement  with information.  Ph.D. thesis, City University  London,  2015.
15.Smith D, Elliott D. Exploring  the barriers to learning from crisis: Or- 
ganizational  learning and crisis. Manag Learn 2007; 38 :519–38.  https: 
// doi.org/ 10.1177/  1350507607083205  .
16.Hussain A, Kuhn K, Shaikh SA. Games for Cybersecurity  Decision-  
Making.  In: X Fang, (ed.). HCI in Games—Second  International  Con- 
ference, HCI-Games  2020, Held as Part of the 22nd HCI International  
Conference,  HCII 2020, Copenhagen,  Denmark,  July 19–24, 2020, Pro- 
ceedings.  vol. 12211 of Lecture Notes in Computer  Science. Switzerland  
AG: Springer,  2020, p. 411–423.
17.Cyber 9/12 Strategy Challenge.  (29 May 2023, date last ac- 
cessed). https:// www.atlanticcouncil.org/  programs/digital-  forensic-  resear 
ch- lab/cyber-  statecraft-  initiative/cyber-  912/.
18.Atlantic Council.  (29 May 2023, date last accessed).  https://www.atlantic  
council.org/ .
19.Cyber 9/12 Strategy Challenge.  (29 May 2023, date last accessed).  https: 
// www.gcsp.ch/  .
20.Jalali MS, Siegel M, Madnick  S. Decision-making  and biases in cyberse- 
curity capability  development:  evidence  from a simulation  game experi- 
ment. J Strateg Inf Syst 2019; 28 :66–82. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/  j.jsis.201  
8.09.003  .
21.Shreeve B, Gralha C, Rashid A,. et al. Making sense of the unknown:  how 
managers  make cyber security decisions.  ACM Trans Softw Eng Methodol  
2022; 32 :1–33.
22.Rhee HS, Ryu YU, Kim CT. Unrealistic  optimism  on information  security 
management.  Comput Secur 2012; 31 :221–2. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/  j.co 
se.2011.12.001  .
23.Merrill N. Security fictions: bridging  speculative  design and computer  se- 
curity. In: Proceedings  of the 2020 ACM Designing  Interactive  Systems 
Conference  . 2020, p. 1727–35.
24.Shapira Z. Risk Taking: A Managerial  Per spectiv e . New York, US: Russell 
Sage Foundation,  1995.
25.Heidt M, Gerlach J, Buxmann  P. A holistic view on organizational  IT 
security:  The influence  of contextual  aspects during IT security decisions.  
In: Proceedings  of the 52nd Hawaii International  Conference  on System 
Sciences . 2019, 6145–54.
26.Schechter  S. Common  pitfalls in writing about security and privacy 
human subjects experiments,  and how to avoid them. Microsoft  2013. 
https:// www.microsoft.com/  en-us/ research/publication/common-pitfalls  
- in- writing- about- security-  and- privacy- human- subjects-  experiments-  an 
d- how- to- avoid- them/(11 August 2023, date last accessed).
27.Anderson  R, Moore T. The economics  of information  security.  Science 
2006; 314 :610–3. https:// doi.org/ 10.1126/  science.1130992  .
28.Cambridge  Centre for Risk Studies, University  of Cambridge  . Cambridge  
Centre for Risk Studies, 2019; Global Risk Index 2020 Executive  Sum- 
mary. 2019.
29.National  Cyber Security Centre . New cyber attack categori-  
sation system to improve UK response  to incidents  2018. 
https:// www.ncsc.gov.uk/  news/new-  cyber- attack- categorisation-  system- 
improve-  uk- response-  incidents  (11 August 2023, date last accessed).
30.Dittrich D, Kenneally  E,. et al. The menlo report: ethical principles  guid- 
ing information  and communication  technology  research.  United States: 
US Department  of Homeland  Security.  2012.
31.Shreeve B, Hallett J, Edwards  M,. et al. “So If Mr Blue Head Here Clicks 
the Link...” risk  thinking  in cyber security decision making. ACM Trans 
Priv Secur 2020; 24 :1–29.32.Rid T, Buchanan  B. Attributing  cyber attacks. J Strateg Stud 2015; 38 :4–
37. https:// doi.org/ 10.1080/  01402390.2014.977382  .
33.Kohler JJ, Fragnière  E. Crisis team setup for better improvisation.  In: 
Proceedings  of the 30th European  Safety and Reliability  Conference  and 
15th Probabilistic  Safety Assessment  and Management  Conference  (ES- 
REL2020  PSAM15)  . 2020;1929–36.
34.Fragnière  E, Konstantas  D, Kohler JJ. On the benefit of mixing varied 
professional  skills to better handle improvisation  phases in crisis manage-  
ment: a qualitative  survey conducted  in Geneva and Valais, Switzerland.  
In: 2019 4th International  Conference  on System Reliability  and Safety 
(ICSRS) . 2019, p. 474–8.
35.Knight R, Nurse JR. A framework  for effective corporate  communication  
after cyber security incidents.  Comput Secur 2020; 99 :102036.  https://do  
i.org/ 10.1016/  j.cose.2020.102036  .
36.National  Cyber Security Centre (UK) . Secure connected  places play- 
book. 2023. https://www  .gov .uk/guidance/secure-  connected-  places- play 
book (11 August 2023, date last accessed).
Appendix—participant-facing  forms  
Pre-e x ercise questions  
1. What is your current role (job title)? [free-text]  
2. How many years of work experience  do you have? [number]  
3. In your current role, who do you report to (given their role/job title)? [free- 
text] 
4. Please give a brief summary  of what IT-related  decision making you carry 
out in your role. [free-text]  
5. What do you perceive as top cybersecurity  risks to organizations?  You may 
choose from any one or more of the following  risks: [Financial,  Geopolit-  
ical, Technology,  Environmental,  Social, and Governance].  If more than 
one, could you rank them in the order of priority, with the highest risk at 
the top (1) down to lower risk at the bottom (6). [Six rows, each with risk 
labels as above]. 
Scenario  questions  (x4—repeated  for each scenario)  
1. Which of the following  categories  does the incident fall into? Please select 
only one. [Cyberattack  categorization  with ‘category  definition’  only] 
2. Please explain why you made your specific choice for Question  1. [free- 
text] 
3. Which of the following  risk types does this incident raise? You may choose 
from any one or more of the following  listed in the ‘Risks’ column below. 
[Financial,  Geopolitical,  Technology,  Environmental,  Social, and Gover- 
nance]. If more than one, please rank them in the order of priority, with 
the highest risk at the top (1) down to lower risk at the bottom (6). [Six 
rows, each with risk labels as above] 
4. For the purposes  of risk mitigation,  what is the split of responsibility  be- 
tween the state and the private sector (the organization  in the scenario)?  
Use the scale below to assign this split between the state and the private 
sector. Choose ‘3’ if you consider  the responsibility  to be equally shared 
between the state and private sector. [5-point scale] 
5. From the description  of the scenario,  what aspects are most uncertain  to 
you, and why? [free-text]  
6. From the description  of the scenario,  what technological  areas are most 
complex  to you, and why? [free-text]  
© The Author(s)  2023. Published  by Oxford University  Press. This is an Open Access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons  Attribution  License 
( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ), which permits unrestricted  reuse, distribution,  and reproduction  in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/9/1/tyad018/7246580 by guest on 05 March 2025
