Journal of Cybersecurity  , 2025, tyae032 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyae032  
Research  Paper  
Measuring  the  size  and  severity  of the  integrated  
cyber  attack  surface  across  US  county  
governments  
Charles  Harry  1 , ‡ , Ido Sivan-Sevilla  2 , * , ‡ , Mark  McDermott  3 , ‡ 
1 School of Public Policy, University  of Maryland,  College  Park, MD 20740, United States 
2 College  of Information,  University  of Maryland,  College  Park, MD 20740, United States 
3 Center for the Governance  of Technology  and Systems,  University  of Maryland,  College  Park, MD 20740, United 
States 
∗Corresponding  author. College  of Information,  University  of Maryland.  College  Park 20740, USA. E-mail: sevilla@umd.edu  
‡ The authors  wish it to be known that, in their opinion,  all authors  should be regarded  as joint first authors  
Received  1 April 2024; revised 23 September  2024; accepted  5 December  2024 
Abstract  
Limited  methodologies  to measure,  enumerate,  aggregate,  and evaluate  the cyber attack surface  of US county gov- 
ernments  prevent  the full estimation  of the importance  of local government  cybersecurity  to national  resilience.  Our 
study aims to address  this gap. We further develop  existing  OSINT-based  methodologies  to measure  the attack sur- 
face and assess the size and vulnerability  of publicly  accessible  county infrastructures.  By collecting  data on 42 735 
Internet-facing  devices  across 3095 US county governments  (98% of all counties),  we show, for the first time, vari- 
ations in size, diversity,  and vulnerability  of exposed  county government  attack surfaces.  We develop  and compare  
service-  and Common  Vulnerability  Exposure  (CVE)-based  measures  for attack surface  diversity  and severity,  each 
showing  different  correlation  trends with county population.  We also highlight  the lack of correlation  between  den- 
sity of CVEs and likelihood  of exploitation  and develop  measures  to quantify  the risk, revealing  the impact of county 
government  vulnerability  on national  cyber resilience.  Previously  studied  as islands  of insecurity,  our novel empirical  
approach  holistically  estimates  potential  county vulnerability  to common  attack vectors  upon service  misconfigura-  
tion and aggregates  CVEs, their severity,  and probability  of exploitation  across county infrastructures,  shedding  light 
on the integrated  and aggregated  attack surface  exposed  across US county governments.  
Keywords:  Attack Surface;  County Government  Cybersecurity;  Cyber Risk Quantification;  OSINT Cyber Research  
Introduction  
The current literature  lacks a rigorous,  data-driven,  universal  ap- 
proach to assess the size and severity  of the attack surfaces  exposed  
by county government  infrastructures.  Despite  a clear call and need 
for these assessments  in US policy documents  [ 1 ] (The 2020 Solarium  
Commission  Report notes: “Critical  infrastructure  resilience  requires  
the United States to be able to develop  a comprehensive  understand-  
ing of national  risk and to translate  that understanding  into resources  
to manage  or minimize  that risk over time.”[  1 ]), policymakers  and 
scholars  have been struggling  to comprehensively  assess cyber risk 
across localized  government  services.  Current  methodologies  to es- 
timate the risk are limited,  usually including  surveys  among county government  employees.  They do not reveal the actual attack surface 
or calculate  its national  impact.  We aim to bridge this gap and fur- 
ther develop  existing  OSINT-based  methodologies  by collecting,  an- 
alyzing,  aggregating,  and evaluating  the cyber attack surface across 
all US county government  systems  that support  service delivery  and 
are exposed  on the Internet.  A usually under-funded  cybersecurity  
sector, county governments  are known to wrestle with attacks on a 
daily basis [ 2 ]. The size, scope, diversity,  and severity  of potential  
threats,  however,  are left unclear.  IT departments  at the county level 
manage  their security  independently,  and there is no holistic view on 
the attack surface and potential  exploitation  across all county gov- 
ernment  networks  (We do not include state-controlled  IT networks  
1 ©The Author(s)  2025. Published  by Oxford University  Press. This is an Open Access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons  
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs  licence ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-  nc- nd/4.0/ ), which permits non-commercial  reproduction  and distribution  of the 
work, in any medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed  in any way, and that the work properly cited. For commercial  re-use, please contact 
journals.permissions@oup.com  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
2 Harry et al. 
in our analysis  as many of the government  support  services  for cit- 
izens are delivered  by independent  county governments,  operate  in 
independent  enclaves  distinct  from state networks,  and are often not 
readily explored  in the literature.).  
W e utilize NIST’ s definition  of attack surface for an organization,  
but expand  on the concept  by stitching  together  thousands  of indi- 
vidual county government  organizations  to build a single cohesive  
integrated  attack surface across 3095 US county governments  (out 
of 3143 US county governments  overall,  excluding  US territories)  
(We could not find domains  for 34 counties  and could not retrieve  
IP addresses  for additional  14 counties  with domains.  Our collected  
data covers 98% of all US county governments  or county-equivalents  
according  to the most recent US Census count.).  Our integrated  at- 
tack surface model encompasses  over 42 735 internet  facing devices,  
with over 51 487 open ports supporting  82 unique services  across the 
3095 county governments  under study. The model was developed  by 
combining  a manually  compiled  list of 4948 web domains  tied to spe- 
cific county governments,  a custom Python application  developed  by 
the authors,  and access to third-party  search engines—Shodan  and 
Censys—which  continuously  and rapidly scan the entire IPv4 address  
space and ∼150 million in-use IPv6 addresses.  
Utilizing  this approach,  we attempt  to answer the following  ques- 
tions: (1) How many internet  facing devices,  ports, software  ser- 
vices, and common  exposures  and vulnerabilities  (CVEs) are exposed  
across the entirety  of county government  networks?  (2) How does the 
integrated  attack surface vary across geographies,  population  centers,  
and type of online services?  (3) What is the relationship,  if any, be- 
tween potential  vulnerability  and county population?  Vulnerability  
frequency  and likelihood  exploitation?  Vulnerability  risk and coun- 
ties’ geographies?  And (4) what policymakers  should do across coun- 
ties to ensure national  cyber resilience?  
Our findings  reveal how nuanced  the regional  attack surface of 
county government  infrastructures  is. We show that exposed  county 
services  follow a pareto (power law) distribution,  and maintain  a pos- 
itive correlation  between  the amount  of services  exposed  and county 
population,  and a positive  correlation  between  the number  of IP 
addresses  publicly  accessible  in a county and the number  of open 
ports and services  available  for potential  exploitation.  We apply and 
compare  service-  and Common  Vulnerability  Exposure  (CVE)-based  
measures  for county government  attack surfaces  and visualize  vul- 
nerability  based on both measures  across counties.  For service-based  
attack surfaces,  our findings  show significant  correlation  with pop- 
ulation levels and demonstrate  the diversity  and quantity  of services  
that local county managers  need to protect.  For CVE-based  attack 
surfaces,  our findings  show the lack of correlation  between  density 
of CVEs and probability  of exploitation  as well as the lack of correla-  
tion between  county population  and CVE-based  risk quantification.  
Clearly,  the data collected  and synthesized  raises some concerns  
surrounding  the inappropriate  use of the aggregated  data presented  
in this paper. While the data utilized  is available  on the internet,  the 
ability to group the data in a more contextually  relevant  manner  re- 
quires us to be careful in how specific devices,  services,  or locations  
are discussed.  Where possible,  we attempt  to obfuscate  specific details 
of technology  and precise vulnerability  location,  and instead focus on 
the strategic  contours  of the attack surface,  informing  questions  rele- 
vant to the likelihood,  frequency,  or effect of cyber risks. Further,  pre- 
sentation  of aggregated  data in Tables is kept at the state or regional  
level with no identification  of specific counties.  Associated  charts and 
maps are designed  with a similar approach.  
The paper proceeds  in five sections.  First, we discuss existing  stud- 
ies on local/county  government  cybersecurity  in the USA and existing  
approaches  for measuring  attack surfaces  with OSINT-based  tools. The review highlights  the discrepancy  between  the limited method-  
ological  approaches  applied  thus far to study county governments,  
and the urgent need to better assess, understand,  and aggregate  vul- 
nerabilities  in regional  infrastructure  supporting  critical functions.  
Then, we introduce  our methodology  and detail our data collection  
steps that leverage  the concept  of “integrated  attack surfaces”along  
with computational  aggregation  across the entirety  of the USA and 
through  the query of four OSINT-based  sources.  The third section 
presents  our results on the size, diversity,  and severity  of county gov- 
ernment  attack surface,  comparing  service-based  and CVE-based  at- 
tack surface measurements.  Fourth,  we summarize  and discuss our 
findings,  detailing  limitations,  policy relevance,  and future research  
avenues.  We show that our approach  both informs  the broader  de- 
bate on how observed  technical  realities  shape state behavior  as well 
as helps clarify how defensive  investments  can help reduce strategic  
cyber risks. We aim to inform policymakers  and provide  the means 
for closing local cybersecurity  gaps in a near real-time  cycle. 
From local and limited  toward  national  and 
holistic  understanding  of county  government  
attack  surfaces  
Despite  the critical functions  they fulfill, there is a paucity  of empiri- 
cal scholarship  on county government  cybersecurity.  To better under- 
stand the security  posture  of county environments,  we currently  rely 
on various  surveys,  some with limited response  rates [In their article, 
Caruson  et al. (2012) discussed  data from a survey that they con- 
ducted among 466 local government  officials  in the state of Florida,  
which produced  a response  rate of 24%. Norris et al. (2019) got a 
11.9% response  rate across a sample of 406 local governments.  In 
a later survey, only 15 employees  responded  to a survey among top 
cybersecurity  officials  in US local governments.  According  to Norris 
and Mateczun  (2022),  CISOs and other cybersecurity  officials  feel 
that revealing  anything  about their cybersecurity  could put the lo- 
cal government  at risk.], that were conducted  across local govern-  
ment employees.  The surveys  indicate  that local governments  in the 
USA have been practicing  cybersecurity  poorly, despite being under 
constant  attack attempts  [ 2 ]. Researchers  found a lack of cybersecu-  
rity preparedness,  awareness,  training,  and adequate  funding  [ 2–7 ], 
which makes local governments  susceptible  to criminals  and state 
hackers,  as demonstrated  by some of the recent and troubling  ran- 
somware  attacks on local government  entities [ 8 ] (In 2019 alone, 
there were 162 reported  ransomware  attacks against state and local 
governments  in the USA.). 
Given their impact on society, documented  gaps in county gov- 
ernment  cybersecurity  are alarming.  County  governments  collect and 
process  sensitive  information  about US citizens,  manage  regional  ar- 
rangements  for emergency  and police response,  facilitate  elections,  
supply water to citizens,  operate  local school districts,  and are re- 
sponsible  for developing  local economies.  Even though those local 
sectors are not traditionally  considered  “critical  infrastructures,”the  
consequences  of poor cybersecurity  at the local level can be disas- 
trous [ 9 ]. 
At scale, county cyber vulnerabilities  can create serious national  
damage.  Cyberattacks  on urban infrastructures  can bring local ser- 
vices to a complete  halt for days or months,  damaging  quality of 
life [ 10 ]. A November  2020 ransomware  attack on the Baltimore  
County  school system,  for instance,  still prevents  retired teachers  
from changing  their medical  insurance  payments,  even after those 
teachers  change their policies.  The district owes thousands  of dollars 
to some retirees who are paying for benefits  they no longer receive,  
while others are underpaying  and will face high insurance  bills soon Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  3 
[ 11 ]. The spread of ‘Internt  of Things’  (IoT) devices across county 
governments  has further increased  the potential  attack surface,  mak- 
ing local governments  individually  more vulnerable,  while generating  
emergent  consequences  for the nation as a whole [ 12 ]. 
At the same time, it has been a challenge  to assess the cyber 
vulnerability  of regional  critical functions.  The interconnectedness  
of local infrastructures  across agencies  and levels of government  
makes it difficult  to grasp the problem  [ 9 ]. National-level  decision  
makers face a gap between  the level of sectors that compromises  
critical infrastructure  and their authority  to control those systems  
[ 13 ], leading to lack of visibility  on the range of vulnerabilities  found 
across independent  local organizations.  Networks  that support  
localized  emergency  services,  allow citizens  to pay water bills, or 
to manage  school districts,  are controlled  at the county level and 
are therefore  difficult  to assess holistically,  since those systems  
run by multiple  and independent  organizations.  Second,  the lack 
of a scalable  approach  to measure  aggregated  cyber risk in these 
organizations  across widely ranging  geographies  is missing,  with 
DHS noting that “we lack integrated  and scalable  adoption  and 
application  of systemic  risk assessment,  resulting  in ineffective  and 
uncoordinated  application  of resources  for cybersecurity” [  14 ]. A 
recent FBI report on Internet  crime showed  how smaller counties  
and municipalities,  with limited budgets  and resources,  are the 
primary  victims of cyber attacks at the local level, stressing  the need 
for a national-level  approach  to protect regional  critical functions  
[ 15 ]. The 2023 White House National  Cybersecurity  Strategy  has 
been calling for the development  of large-scale,  system-wide  metrics 
for cybersecurity  to better measure  and assess the risk [ 16 ]. Still, 
county government  operations,  that can be categorized  under one 
of the 16 critical sectors (Local Government  can be classified  under 
“Government  Facilities,” “Emergency  Services,” or  “Water and 
W aste W ater Systems” under  PPD-21.)  or as part of several sets of 
National  Critical  Functions  (NCF) (Several  local government  op- 
erations  are characterized  under CISA’s NCF framework  include:  “
Operate  Government,”“Educate  and Train,”“Manage  Wastewater,”
“Provide  Public Safety,”"Enforce  Law,”and  “Conduct  Elections”.),  
cannot be easily assessed  or prioritized  for defense  funding.  
The high stakes of cyber insecurity  at the county level along with 
the limited methodologies  applied  thus far to study this space, are 
especially  surprising  given existing  knowledge  on OSINT-based  at- 
tack surface measurements.  Scholars  have been using OSINT-based  
tools, like Shodan,  Censys,  and others, to analyze  publicly  available  
IP addresses,  services  and vulnerabilities,  measuring  attack surfaces  
across European  countries,  hospitals  in Germany,  the telecom  sec- 
tor in Finland,  and critical infrastructures  in Turkey and Portugal  
[ 17–22 ]. Most studies highlight  commonly  used protocols  and ser- 
vices across these sectors,  flagging  certain unsecure  features  in one 
[ 18 ] or more service configurations  [ 17 ], across one or more critical 
sectors.  A few studies also engage in CVE-based  vulnerability  iden- 
tification  and their associated  Common  Vulnerability  Scoring  Sys- 
tem (CVSS) scores for severity,  providing  an additional  dimension  
for capturing  the security  posture  of organizations  by linking col- 
lected data with NIST’s vulnerability  database  [ 19–22 ]. Even though 
previous  research  found that combining  multiple  OSINT-based  tools 
provides  a more comprehensive  view of the attack surface [ 23 ], a 
few studies only use a single OSINT  resource  for their attack surface 
measurement  [ 17 , 19 ]. 
Across these studies,  various  gaps in attack surface measurement  
still exist. There is no clear methodology  for evaluating  and quanti- 
fying cyber risk (per region/per  sector) based on collected  data. The 
demographic  and geographical  context  of the vulnerability  are also 
missing  and there are no clear indicators  for the severity  and diversity  of the risk. At the same time, existing  work on attack surface mea- 
surement  is a promising  starting  point for closing the gaps in attack 
surface enumeration  and evaluation.  We aim to automate  the use of a 
combination  of existing  OSINT-based  tools to group infrastructures  
per our unit of analysis—counties—and  show vulnerability  identifi-  
cation and assessment  at the granular  county-level  across infrastruc-  
ture sectors.  We also aspire to produce  a more nuanced  measurement  
of the risk per county, appreciating  the distinct  value of service-  and 
CVE-based  measurements  of the attack surface.  
Methodology:  deﬁning,  enumerating,  and 
aggregating  county-level  attack  surfaces  based  
on OSINT  tools 
The term “attack  surface”was  originally  coined by Michael  Howard  
in an MSDN magazine  article (2003).  It was then used by Howard,  
Pincus, and Wing (2005) as a metaphor  for risk assessment  in soft- 
ware, and appeared  in a variety of contexts  since [ 24 ] [Theisen  et 
al. (2018) conducted  a systematic  literature  review on “cyber attack 
surface”definitions,  identifying  644 works from prior literature  that 
use the term, including  research  papers, magazine  articles,  and tech- 
nical reports [ 25 ].], relating  to a range of attributes.  For simplicity,  we 
adopt the definition  used in publications  by the National  Institute  of 
Standards  and Technology  (NIST),  which defines cyber attack surface 
as “the set of points on the boundary  of a system,  a system element,  
or an environment  where an attacker  can try to enter, cause an ef- 
fect on, or extract data from”[  26 ]. Simply put, we relate to the term 
“attack  surface”as  the potential  entry points to an organization.  
To measure  the attack surface exposed  by county governments  we 
chose to rely on passive reconnaissance.  Active scanning  of county in- 
frastructures  without  explicit  permission  can be considered  unethical  
and illegal. Therefore,  we do not directly  interact  with county sys- 
tems or perform  active scans ourselves.  We build on existing  works 
that apply passive reconnaissance  through  OSINT-based  tools and 
leverage  the capabilities  of specialized  search engines—Shodan  and 
Censys—that  conduct  and constantly  update their comprehensive  
Internet  scans, including  scans of county government  networks.  To 
evaluate  the collected  data, we use two additional  publicly  available  
sources—NIST’s  National  Vulnerability  Database  (NVD) to retrieve  
CVSS scores and First.org  to retrieve  EPSS scores for collected  CVEs. 
We automate  data collection  via these public resources  and create our 
framework  to assess the size and exposed  ports, services,  common  
platform  enumeration  (CPE) values, the associated  CVEs for the re- 
vealed CPEs, and the severity  and probability  of exploitation  rates of 
collected  CVEs across all US county governments.  
We stitch together  all publicly  available  county government  in- 
frastructures  to comparatively  analyze  and aggregate  the cyber attack 
surface across three locality  scales—county,  state, and Federal  Emer- 
gency Management  Agency  (FEMA)  regions.  We aim to offer a holis- 
tic, integrated  picture of the size, scope, scale, diversity,  and severity  of 
cybersecurity  vulnerabilities  that county governments  create. Instead 
of considering  county governments  as islands for cyber-insecurity,  we 
aggregate  vulnerabilities  in publicly  accessible  county government  in- 
frastructures  to understand  their potential  national  impact.  
Our methodology  measures  a specific subset of the entire county 
government  attack surface—the  range of services  on county govern-  
ment domains  that are publicly  available  for potential  exploitation.  
Our goal is to compile  an “integrated  cyber attack surface”across  all 
US county governments  and understand  consequences  at the national  
level. The validity  of this approach  was recently  demonstrated  when 
researchers  from Censys found hundreds  of publicly  facing devices in 
more than 50 Federal  Civilian  Executive  Branch organizations  that Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
4 Harry et al. 
were exposed  to exploitations  across a variety of services  [ 27 ]. We 
seek to apply a broader  approach,  across all regions of the USA. 
Our data collection  process  started with compiling  a list of all 
3143 US county governments  across 50 states + DC (not including  
US territories)  from the most recent Census data on US county gov- 
ernments  [ 28 ]. For each county we identified  and collected  the .gov, 
.org, .net, and .com county domains.  This was done through  associa-  
tion of the latest officially  registered  .gov addresses  from the General  
Services  Administration  [ 29 ] and supplemented  through  open source 
research  to manually  add county domains  we could systematically  
map across states for every county (For 32 counties  we could not 
find any domains.  Also, at this first data collection  phase, we could 
not systematically  map all county infrastructures.  Essential  services  
such as hospitals,  treatment  centers,  fire departments,  and wastew-  
ater infrastructures  are likely left out in this first step. A few steps 
later, when we collect county IP addresses  based on SSL/TLS  certifi- 
cates with the county domain  name, we might pick up county services  
that go beyond  our initial list of domains.).  
1. General  County  Services  [county-name.gov]:  the domains  asso- 
ciated with this category  include the general county website,  with 
options  for residents  to pay utility bills (e.g. water), look up voter 
registration  information,  as well as general county government  
operations.  
2. County  School Board [county-name-schools.org/.net/.com]:  
each county maintains  control over its public schools.  Counties  
typically  have a unique domain  for this part of county govern-  
ment. 
3. Economic  Development  [county-name-economic-development.  
org/.com]:  some counties  maintain  a separate  organization  to 
develop  economic  activity,  and associate  a separate  domain  for 
it. 
To be consistent  with our county-level  data collection,  we chose 
to exclude  state-level  domains  that are not associated  with specific 
county governments.  For instance,  the domain  (in.gov)  includes  more 
than 900 IP addresses  from the state of Indiana,  but was not evalu- 
ated with our dataset because  it represents  state-level  infrastructure  
that is likely supported  by better funded and more consistent  state- 
level efforts. Generally,  county governments  operate  in conjunction  
with state entities,  but independently.  By capturing  only county-level  
infrastructures  our approach  allows for a more standardized,  bal- 
anced, precise,  and focused  scale of measurement  of county-level  vul- 
nerability.  Therefore,  we included  in our dataset only publicly  acces- 
sible domains  that can be associated  with one unique combination  
of state name and county name (One outlier for that in the data is 
the domain  wjccschools.org,  which is associated  with more than one 
county equivalent  in Virginia—Williamsburg  City and James City 
County.).  
We assembled  a list of 4948 US county government  domains.  
The federated  list was then categorized  based on the associated  
county, state, and FEMA region of each domain.  The categoriza-  
tion of county domains  to FEMA regions was done for the pur- 
pose of being consistent  with how US federal policymakers  group to- 
gether regions to assess national  risk. The domain  list was further ex- 
panded  to a set of query terms including  the www. prefix for domains  
(as some counties  hosted only one of the pair “domain.gov” and  
“www.domain.gov’  ’ ), and the IP addresses  behind each domain,  de- 
termined  by DNS type A and type AAAA records.  These IP addresses  
are the web server addresses  tied to domains,  which include informa-  
tion from content  delivery  networks  used by government  counties.  
With our harvested  domain  sets and several IP addresses  associ- 
ated with web servers in county’s  content  delivery  networks,  our team generated  a procedure  using Python code to query the assembled  
county domains  through  Censys—a  platform  that regularly  scans 
Internet-facing  infrastructure,  associates  it with domain  names, and 
provides  the consolidated  data through  an interactive  API [ 30 ]. From 
the domain  queried  Censys data we collected  the IP addresses,  open 
ports, and services  associated  with county government  domains.  
Those Censys queries enabled  a significant  enrichment  and ex- 
pansion  of our set of IP addresses  per county infrastructures.  First, 
based on past Censys queries and existing  databases,  the Censys ser- 
vice associated  additional  county subdomains  to our initial query, be- 
yond our assembled  domains  list. If a county used a subdomain  util- 
ity .county  .gov , Censys would associate  our query term “county.gov”
with that previously  unidentified  domain  name “utility .county  .gov .”
Second,  Censys relies on its on-going  collection  of transport  layer 
security  (TLS)/secure  sockets layer (SSL) certificates  in past Internet  
scans from publicly  facing devices that are associated  with our do- 
mains of interest  [In this context,  the TLS and SSL certificates  are 
security  certificates  that are used by county servers and include the 
county domain  name under the “Subject  Distinguished  Name (DN)”
rubric in the certificate,  giving us a method  to associate  additional  IP 
addresses/devices  with each county. Those certificates  are routinely  
collected  by the Censys service,  once observed  as part of a TLS hand- 
shake during previous  Censys scans of the public Internet.).  This 
provides  data on additional  IP addresses  that have no domain  name 
and are not directly  associated  with the web servers registered  with 
the Regional  Internet  Registries  and the hosting  of websites  that are 
linked to the registered  county domains.  Those newly discovered  IP 
addresses  hold a county-related  security  certificate,  and are therefore  
part of the county infrastructure  and potential  attack surface.  This 
allowed  us to increase  the publicly  identified  infrastructure  in coun- 
ties by a factor of five, well beyond  the ∼5000 IP addresses  of the 
web servers across the three county government  categories  we started 
with. We were able to capture  an array of publicly  facing devices 
across all county government  functions,  even without  domain  names, 
that potentially  include fire protection,  parks and recreation  services,  
wastewater  infrastructures,  housing  services,  emergency  medical  ser- 
vices, municipal  courts, treatment  centers,  transportation  services  (in- 
cluding  public transportation),  and social services  [ 31 , 32 ]. 
Then, based on Censys’  port scans on the various  IPs that were 
found to be associated  with the county, we were able to identify  the 
ports and related services  that are open for potential  exploitation  
per county . Importantly  , Censys has the ability to recognize  exposed  
services  such as Microsoft’s  Remote  Desktop  Protocol  (RDP) or SQL 
Server based on the service banner,  regardless  of the port number  they 
are listening  on. We aggregated  the results from the query set back 
to the original  domains,  combining  the IP addresses  returned  from 
Censys and our DNS queries,  with the ports and services  that were 
found for each of those IP addresses.  
The set of resulting  IP addresses  was then used as input to an- 
other commercial  Internet  scanner,  Shodan,  which regularly  scans 
the Internet  and provides  CPE values for each IP, and the associated  
common  exposures  and vulnerabilities  (CVEs) for those CPEs. It is 
important  to note that we do not include in our data all provided  
CVEs for the CPEs found by Shodan.  We only collect CVEs for CPEs 
that have specific associated  version numbers  for the software  plat- 
form (for example,  preserving  “cpe:/a:  jquery: jquery:2.2.0”but  not 
“cpe:/a:  jquery: jquery”).  The strategy  ensures  less false positives,  al- 
lowing to collect only “non-verified”CVE  data that is associated  with 
a specific version of the exposed  county software  platform  (“Non-  
verified”CVEs  is a terminology  used by Shodan,  indicating  that the 
output provided  relates to known CVEs associated  with the CPE that 
was found. Those CVEs could be patched,  but still appear as CVEs in Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  5 
Ta b l e 1. Data points collected  on each county domain.  
Domain  X Query 
terms for 
domain X IPs for 
domain X 
query terms Number  of 
IPs Ports for 
domain X 
query terms Number  of 
open ports Services  
exposed  for 
domain X CPEv2.2  
and CPE 
v2.3 CVEs per 
CPE CVSS and 
EPSS per 
CVE 
Figure 1. Data collection  and aggregation  steps per county. 
our data. That is why we are referring  to them as “potential  CVEs”.  
We only report on CVEs from versioned  CPEs to be as specific as 
possible  for each county.).  
To obtain the higher confidence  set of CVEs for the subset of ver- 
sioned CPE 2.2, we used NIST’s NVD “cpeMatch”value.  However,  
because  the NVD’s cpeMatch  only reports CPE v2.3, we were first 
required  to convert  our obtained  CPE v2.2 to CPE v2.3 format,  using 
Python3’s  cpe module.  This NVD data was additionally  used to map 
our versioned  CPE v2.3 (through  associated  CVE) to CVSS metrics 
also present in our database.  Finally, we used an Exploit  Prediction  
Scoring  System (EPSS) API from First.org  to link the collected  CVEs 
to their (current,  at the time of the run) EPSS scores. 
At the end of this process,  each original  county domain  from our 
list had the (1) IP addresses  associated  with it from both Censys and 
DNS records;  (2) count of those IP addresses;  (3) open ports that 
were found to be associated  with those IP addresses;  (4) services  that 
were tied to those ports; (5) CPEs v2.2 and v2.3 running  on those 
IP address  and their associated,  nonverified,  CVEs; (6) the associated  
CVSS scores for those CVEs; and (7) the EPSS score for each CVE 
that was found. See Table 1 for the data points collected  on each 
county’s  domain  in the list. 
Appendices  1 –4 include output examples  from Censys,  Shodan,  
and NIST. The examples  show the type of data we put together  for 
every county-related  domain  and IP address.  
Figure 1 visualizes  the steps in our data collection  and aggregation  
efforts for mapping  the attack surface per county. The starting  input 
to our computational  data collection  appears  in black. In light blue you can see results used for additional  queries and in dark blue data 
outputs  that we associate  with each county government  domain  that 
is eventually  included  in its attack surface data. The server icons mark 
the points where we reached  out to OSINT-based  databases.  
Descriptive  and comparative  analysis  of 
county-level  size and severity  of attack  surfaces  
To understand  the amount  and severity  of attack surfaces  exposed  
by publicly  facing devices across county governments  we enumer-  
ated 3095 out of 3143 (98.5%)  US county government  networks  
across 4905 individual  web domains.  4905 domains  remained  from 
the 4948 after, 34 of the counties  had no domains,  and for 15 coun- 
ties with only one domain,  no IP address  was found. The scan of 
county domains  took place on February  of 2024. 
Out of the 49 missing  counties,  18 are from the state of Okla- 
homa, where counties  mostly use state-level  infrastructures,  5 from 
Alaska,  5 from South Dakota,  4 from Montana,  4 from North 
Dakota,  3 from Indiana,  2 from Wisconsin,  and the 8 other states 
have one county missing  (We have domains  for 3095 out of 3143 US 
counties.  We could not find domains/IP  addresses  for the following  
48 counties:  MS, Issaquena;  IN, Fayette;  IN, Randolph;  IN, White; 
NM, De Baca; OK, Cherokee;  OK, Ellis; OK, Harmon;  OK, Harper;  
OK, Haskell;  OK, Jefferson;  OK, Johnston;  OK, Major; OK, Mar- 
shall; OK, McIntosh;  OK, Murray;  OK, Nowata;  OK, Okfuskee;  OK, 
Pushmataha;  OK, Roger Mills; OK, Wagoner;  OK, Washita;  OK, Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
6 Harry et al. 
Figure 2. Overall number of IP addresses  per state across all states. 
Figure 3. Median number of IP addresses  per county across all states. 
Woods;  KS, Edwards;  SD, Brule; SD, Grant; SD, Jackson;  SD, Mel- 
lette; SD, Potter; HI, Kalawao;  AK, Chugach;  AK, Copper  River; AK, 
Kusilvak;  AK, Prince of Wales-Hyder;  AK, Southeast  Fairbanks;  NE, 
Hitchcock;  MT, Granite;  MT, Meagher;  MT, Roosevelt;  MT, Sheri- 
dan; ND, Dunn; ND, Steele; ND, Sheridan;  ND, Kidder;  WI, Forest; 
WI, Iron; IL, Jefferson;  and MO, Putnam.).  Missing  data on those 
counties  do not introduce  bias in the results since the states with 
missing  counties  are sporadically  spread across the nation, and the 
missing  counties  are a small percentage  of the total number  of coun- 
ties in that state (less than 10%). Two outliers  are the states of Okla- 
homa for which 18 out of 77 counties  (23%) are missing,  and Alaska,  
for which 5 out of 30 counties  are missing  (16.67%).  Still, the vast 
majority  of counties  across the nation (98.5%)  and counties  within 
a state (75%–100%)  are covered  in the data. 
We found a total of 42 735 individual  IP addresses,  averaging  8.58 
accessible  IP addresses  per county, with the median  IPs per county be- 
ing three addresses.  The minimum  number  of IP addresses  per county 
was 1 and the maximum  per county was 677 (in Carbon,  WY). We 
found a total number  of 51 487 open ports, exposing  83 distinct  ser- 
vices across county government  networks.  Each county has 10.34 
open ports on average,  with the median  being five open ports per 
county. The minimum  number  of open ports per county was 1, and the maximum  was 1262 open ports for one of the counties.  The four 
subsections  below present and analyze  our findings.  The next two 
subsections  discuss the size of the revealed  attack surface and the 
following  two sections  present and discuss attack surface diversity  
and severity  . 
Attack  surface  size: amount  and variation  in exposed  IP 
addresses  
Figure 2 shows variations  in the number  of IP addresses  across states. 
We can see the distribution  of IP addresses  follows  a Pareto distribu-  
tion with 15 states (30%) having over 1000 exposed  addresses,  but 
most states have 500 or less publicly  available  IP addresses.  
Figure 3 shows the median  count of IP addresses  in counties  per 
state. A few counties  in our data have a wide array of exposed  in- 
frastructure  and might skew the average.  We decided  to look at the 
median  number  of IP addresses  per county instead,  to get a better 
estimate  of the attack surface size per state. The state of California,  
for instance,  has 58 counties,  each with its own set of IP infrastruc-  
ture discovered  through  our methodology.  Considering  the IP ad- 
dresses that belong to each county in California,  the median  number  
of county IP addresses  for California  is 12. Most states in Fig. 3 have 
a median  number  of IP addresses  per county that ranges between  1 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  7 
Figure 4. Sum of IP addresses  per state across FEMA regions at a logarithmic  scale. 
and 6. Then we see states with a median  count of IP addresses  be- 
tween 6 and 12. 
When aggregating  publicly  available  IP addresses  to the FEMA 
region level (FEMA  regions consist of 10 regions in the continental  
USA and territories,  grouping  neighboring  states together.  Those re- 
gions are traditionally  used by US policymakers  to assess risks across 
the country  [ 33 ]. We do not account  for infrastructure  found in ter- 
ritories (e.g. Marshall  Islands),  which are often aggregated  in FEMA 
regions.  While this excludes  infrastructure  in some FEMA regions,  
the focus of our efforts remain within states. We make this decision  
given the complicated  structure  of territory  governance,  which would 
unnecessarily  complicate  the results of this analysis.),  we see that the 
attack surface for certain regions is potentially  larger than for oth- 
ers. We tested for correlation  between  state population  and amount  
of IP addresses  exposed  per state and found a fairly strong positive  
relationship,  with a correlation  coefficient  of 0.7303 that is statis- 
tically significant  at the 99% confidence  level ( P -value = 1.744e-  
09). The need for county and local services  grows as popula-  
tion expands,  leading to more exposed  IP addresses  at the county 
level. 
Figure 4 shows the amount  of IP addresses  in every state, per 
FEMA region, at a logarithmic  scale. We can see how highly pop- 
ulated states like California  or New York expose thousands  of IP 
addresses,  while areas that are less populated,  such as Rhode Island 
or Delaware,  expose much less IP addresses.  FEMA Region #4, in 
the Southeast  of the nation, exposes  a lot of IP addresses,  distributed  
almost evenly across all states in the region. FEMA Regions  #5, #7, 
and #10 follow the same pattern,  while in others, the amount  of IP 
addresses  per state varies more significantly.  
Attack  surface  size: amount  and variation  in exposed  
ports 
A port is a process  or application-specific  software  element  serv- 
ing as a communication  start and/or endpoint  for the Transport  
Layer IP protocols  UDP and TCP [ 34 ]. Ports are software  based 
and managed  by a computer’s  operating  system,  with services  (ap- 
plications/programs)  running  behind them, essentially  serving as the 
interface  points between  running  programs  on computers.  Because  they serve as an entry point for humans  or other computers  to give 
commands  to a hosting  computer  or obtain information  from the 
computer,  open access to services  comes with risks proportional  to 
the access that the service provides.  
When analyzing  open and publicly  available  ports per county, and 
aggregating  the data to the state FEMA region levels, we see that 
different  regions are differently  exposed.  Figure 5 shows a histogram  
of the amount  of unique open ports per state (in a unique set of IP 
and port). Twenty-seven  states expose less than 1000 ports each, with 
Delaware  and Rhode Island, on the lower-end,  exposing  less than 100 
distinct  open ports each. Twenty-three  states expose more than 1000 
ports, with Virginia  exposing  more than 4000 unique ports when 
assessing  all of the IP infrastructure  evaluated  in its jurisdiction.  
Figure 6 shows the median  count of open ports in counties  per 
state. For 32 states, the median  number  of open ports per county is 
more than five, with seven states having more than 10 open ports as 
the median  number  per county. 
Aggregating  the number  of unique open ports per state to the 
FEMA region level (Fig. 7 ), we see a geographic  distribution  of ports 
per state and FEMA region. We used a logarithmic  scale to show the 
different  scales in the amount  of open ports across states. FEMA re- 
gions #1, #2, and #10 have a couple thousands  of open ports, with 
a variation  between  states. In region #1, for example,  Rhode Island, 
Vermont,  New Hampshire,  and Maine are at scale of hundreds  or 
below unique open ports. Massachusetts  exposes  around 374 unique 
open ports, and Connecticut  only a couple of hundred.  Highly pop- 
ulated areas—New  York and California—drive  their FEMA Regions  
#2 and #9 to hold the highest average  of unique open ports per 
county and the highest standard  deviation  among the number  of 
open ports per county, with California  exposing  over two thousand  
unique open ports. Regions  #3, #4, and #5 expose more than 15 000 
open ports, with every state but Delware  contributing  a significant  
amount,  especially  Florida and Virginia  with around 1500 and 2800 
open ports each, respectively.  FEMA Region #4 is the most concern-  
ing region for unique open ports, with more than 13 000 open ports 
that are broadly  distributed  across all eight states. Mississippi  has 
the fewest with under 1000. Alabama,  Kentucky,  Florida,  North, 
and South Carolina  all have under 2000 unique open ports, while 
Tennessee  and Georgia  both have over 2300 unique open ports. We Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
8 Harry et al. 
Figure 5. Overall number of open ports per state across all states. 
Figure 6. Median number of open ports per county across all states. 
Figure 7. Sum of open ports per state across FEMA regions. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  9 
Figure 8. Median IP addresses  count versus median open ports per county at the state level. 
Figure 9. Median IP addresses  count versus median open ports per county at FEMA region level. 
tested for correlation  between  state population  and open ports and 
found a moderate  positive  relationship  with a correlation  coefficient  
of 0.4978 that is statistically  significant  at the 99% confidence  level 
( P -value = .0002345).  
Figure 8 shows the crossing  of the median  IP addresses  count 
with the median  unique open port counts per county at the state 
level. We see an unsurprising  trend line according  to which the larger 
the number  of accessible  IP addresses  in state counties  is, the more 
unique open ports appear in those counties.  This has been evident 
across highly populated  areas like California  or New York. With 
more county government  infrastructure  comes a greater number  of 
access vectors potentially  used by threat actors. 
In Fig. 9 , we see the same crossing  but grouped  at the FEMA re- 
gion level. FEMA region #9, which includes  California,  is likely to 
be the most highly exposed  FEMA region, followed  by Region #2, which includes  New York. Regions  #6 and #7, which are less pop- 
ulated, are potentially  the least exposed  regions with small median  
numbers  for IP addresses  and open ports per county. Just like at the 
state level in Fig. 8 , this figure shows that the positive  slope created 
by contrasting  the number  of IP addresses  with the number  of open 
ports is maintained  at the county level. 
Attack  surface  di ver sity: amount  and variation  in 
exposed  services  
Next, we investigated  the type of services  that could be exploited  
to develop  a service-based  measurement  of attack surface diversity.  
Thus far, we showed  aggregated  data on the size of the attack sur- 
face, detailing  publicly  accessible  IP addresses  and open ports in 
each county, aggregated  at the state and FEMA region levels. We Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
10 Harry et al. 
Figure 10. Heatmap  of county government  vulnerability  based on exposure  to one or more of four service-based  attack scenarios.  
demonstrated  a variation  in the sizes of attack surfaces,  as well as a 
linear relationship  between  deployed  county infrastructure  (number  
of IP addresses)  and exposed  ports, and between  IPs, ports, and state 
population.  What is still missing  is a measurement  of the quality of 
the exposed  attack surfaces,  that would allow us to understand  how 
many different  types of attack an organization  might be subjected  to. 
It is important  to note that exposure  of a service in and of itself does 
not mean it can or will be attacked.  Attacks  often require a service to 
be misconfigured  or compromised  through  exposed  credentials.  De- 
spite this limitation,  mapping  exposed  services  in the attack surface 
does highlight  potential  vectors of attack across the entirety  of the 
integrated  attack surface.  
The rationale  for service-based  attack surface measurement  is de- 
tailed below. Open and available  services  for potential  exploitation  
are an important  attack surface component  since exposure  or mis- 
configuration  of those services,  which is not visible in the number  
of potential  CVEs associated  with that service,  can lead to serious 
damage.  Misconfiguration  or use of credentials  with exposed  services  
(e.g. TELNET)  are susceptible  to infiltration  by various  threat actor 
groups (In some cases, unencrypted  services  such as FTP or TELNET  
can allow user passwords  to be compromised  through  collection  of 
unencrypted  traffic in so called man-in-the-middle  attacks.).  Once ex- 
posed, services  in combination  with either a vulnerability  or a set of 
valid credentials  can facilitate  illicit access into a victim’s  network.  
A recent CISA report found that the most common  successful  attack 
technique  is hacking  via “Valid Accounts,”cracking  password  hashes 
was found to be successful  in almost 90% of US Coast Guard risk 
and vulnerability  assessments  during 2023. Valid accounts  can be 
accessed  through  default or stolen administrator  accounts,  or former 
employee  accounts  that have not been removed  from the domain  con- 
troller [ 35 ]. In one such case, threat actors leveraging  the Trigona  ran- 
somware  ecosystem,  gained access to their victim’s  network  through  
the use of compromised  user credentials  and an exposed  RDP service 
on a publicly  accessible  device (The Trigona  ransomware  was lever- aged in December  2022, with the technical  details of the event docu- 
mented  on the DFIR technical  blog [ 36 ].). Once a system is accessed,  
threat actors are able to engage in a variety of actions that lead to 
impacts  on the confidentiality  , integrity  , or accessibility  of data and 
systems.  
To evaluate  county vulnerabilities  to specific open services  our re- 
search looked at four specific classes of attack scenarios.  Even though 
we found 82 unique services  utilized  across county government  net- 
works, we focus our analysis  on services  that enable four known 
types of attacks,  which have been recently  utilized  by hackers.  This 
enables  us to demonstrate  the applicability  of our methodology  for 
future policy efforts aimed at reducing  cyber risk in the county gov- 
ernment  sector. Although  we have the ability to point to very specific 
regions,  counties,  and systems  susceptible  to these specific attacks,  
we choose to aggregate  results to the state level. These aggregations  
limit exposure  of exactly which counties  and which networks  might 
be susceptible  to which attacks.  This is done in an attempt  to not ac- 
cidentally  point state hackers  or criminals  toward specific vulnerable  
infrastructures.  
While our approach  to categorizing  service vulnerabilities  is tied 
to examples  of specific services  shown to be used in hacking  episodes,  
it is possible  to define additional  categories  that might result in 
differing  measures  of concern.  For example,  researchers  interested  
in parsing  vulnerabilities  specific to virtual machine  management  
(CISA identified  CVE-2021-21985,  a vulnerability  to VMware  vCen- 
ter Software  as a frequently  exploited  vulnerability  in 2021.), web- 
conference  software  [ 37 ], or even enterprise  security  products  [ 38 ] 
might define diversity  measures  differently.  While this is an interest-  
ing question  and one bound to raise additional  questions  concerning  
optimal  measures,  it remains  outside the bounds  of this paper. 
Our visualization  in Fig. 10 aggregates  the number  of attack vec- 
tors that might be available  in the scanned  counties.  Each county is 
scored between  0 and 4 according  to the following  method:  when 
one of the four following  attack scenarios  was found to be available  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  11 
in that county, the county gets an additional  point. Counties  that get 
the score of 4 are potentially  vulnerable  to all of the four following  
attack scenarios,  highlighting  a large diversity  of potential  attacks.  
Findings  at the precise county level are masked  through  a heat-map  
type of visualization.  
We first classify which government  counties  are potentially  sus- 
ceptible  to DNS misconfiguration.  For counties  where the DNS ser- 
vice was publicly  available  for exploitation,  the attacker  can flood 
the county domain’s  DNS servers in an attempt  to disrupt DNS res- 
olution for that domain.  Such flooding  might compromise  the ability 
of a county website/web  application/online  service to respond  to le- 
gitimate  traffic from residents  [ 39 ]. In a recent example,  healthcare  
websites  in the USA were flooded  by fake DNS requests  in on-going  
attacks.  The attack was deployed  by botnets  consisting  of thousands  
of hacked devices,  which sent requests  to exposed  DNS services  in a 
manner  that overwhelmed  the processing  ability of devices disturbing  
the functionality  of healthcare  websites  across the county [ 40 ]. 
We are also interested  in classifying  government  counties  that 
may become  targets for illicit access to government  databases.  
Our data collection  came across various  open services  tied to 
the use of databases  (MSSQL,  MYSQL,  and POSTGRES)  across 
US government  counties,  making  a potentially  critical government  
database  server accessible  from the Internet.  Hackers  might re- 
veal an outdated  SQL server or lack of password  protection  on 
a database  server that could make the database  vulnerable  to 
unauthorized  access. Exposure  of database  services  on the or- 
ganization’s  attack surface exposes  the potential  for threat ac- 
tors to either take advantage  of a known vulnerability  in the 
underlying  software  or to craft requests  that bypass authentica-  
tion processes  (An example  of how SQL injection  can be per- 
formed can be found here: https:// owasp.org/  www-community/  
attacks/SQL  _ Injection  ). In a recent example,  a SQL injection  vulner- 
ability was exposed  at the file transfer  software  MOVEit,  allowing  
a malicious  actor to take over clients’ databases.  The US Cyberse-  
curity and Infrastructure  Security  Agency  (CISA) issued an alert for 
MOVEit  clients to patch their systems  immediately  [ 41 ], demonstrat-  
ing the criticality  of such vulnerability.  
The third type of service-based  attack we were interested  to in- 
spect enables  insecure  authorization  to county government  systems  
and devices.  We classified  government  counties  based on whether  
TELNET,  FTP, RDP, or SSH services  were found to be open for pos- 
sible exploitation  on their networks.  A recent malware  spotted  by re- 
searchers  in the wild was found to be using default TELNET  creden-  
tials to exploit known flaws and perform  remote code execution  on 
target devices.  Once a device was breached,  it became  part of a botnet 
army for a set of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks.  The malicious  activ- 
ity took place between  July 2022 and December  2022, demonstrat-  
ing the risk in having insecure  TELNET  services  open for exploita-  
tion [ 42 ]. In another  example,  insecure  authorization  through  the 
RDP was named by the FBI as one of the top three infection  vectors 
for ransomware  incidents  in 2022 [ 15 ]. CISA has recently  published  
an advisory  on the BianLian  Ransomware  Group, detailing  how the 
group has been utilizing  open RDP and FTP ports at their victims 
[ 43 ]. The FBI recommends  those who use RDP to secure and closely 
monitor  it, which raises concerns  given the frequency  and variety of 
counties  in our data that expose such service to the public. Similar 
concerns  were raised by the state of New Jersey on open RDP, TEL- 
NET, and SSH services  among organizations,  based on their threat 
intelligence  data [ 44 ]. 
We were also inspecting  the data to realize which counties  expose 
services  that allow insecure  file sharing,  such as NetBIOS  and SMB. 
These services  enable file sharing  and printing  in Microsoft  Windows  environments,  but were found to be vulnerable  and dangerous,  caus- 
ing the notorious  WannaCry  ransomware  attack in 2017. The at- 
tack struck a number  of important  and high-profile  systems,  includ- 
ing the UK’s National  Health Service,  and overall affected  more than 
300 000 computers  across 150 countries,  costing hundreds  of mil- 
lions of dollars to the victims [ 45 , 46 ]. The attack was spread through  
flaws in the SMB protocol,  and an unpatched  version of the imple- 
mentation  of that protocol  could enable the execution  of arbitrary  
code by attacks,  an exploit known as EternalBlue  [ 47 ]. Microsoft  
specifically  asked its customers  to block access to the SMB service 
from the Internet  and protect devices inside the organizational  net- 
work, in contrast  to what our data show for many US government  
counties  [ 48 ]. 
Figure 10 presents  a heatmap  of US counties’  potential  vulnerabil-  
ity to those open services,  colored  on a scale from green to red based 
on the number  of attack scenarios  from the above that are potentially  
exposed  in their infrastructures.  Counties  get the score of 4 and are 
colored  dark red when all four types of attacks can potentially  take 
place in their networks.  Counties  get the score of 0 and are colored  
light green when none of the attack scenarios  above was found to 
be possible  in their networks.  We have 46 counties  in our data with- 
out domains  or IP addresses,  and they are colored  white/gray  in the 
heatmap.  We can see that highly populated  regions are potentially  
more vulnerable  to service-based  attacks,  with the states of Califor-  
nia, Florida,  and Virginia  raising particular  concerns.  The Midwest  
and Northeast  parts of the nation pose less of a concern  for those 
types of attacks.  
US states that are not visible in Fig. 10 —Hawaii  and Alaska—
are showing  some concern  as well. Alaska (Fig. 11 ) has two bor- 
oughs (equivalent  to counties)  that were scored 3—susceptible  to 
three types of attacks.  Hawaii  (Fig. 11 ) only has a single county with 
a severity  score of 2, however  that county is the location  of the single 
largest population  center and therefore  produces  a significant  con- 
cern to the vast majority  of residents  in that state. County  regions 
were reduced  to dots in these maps. 
We then wanted  to understand  whether  there is a connection  be- 
tween the amount  of infrastructure  that county IT administrators  
need to manage,  and exposure  of those counties  to one or more of 
the service misconfiguration  attack vectors mapped  in our data. Fig- 
ure 12 shows that distribution  at the state level. We see that when 
the IP count is below 1000, there is a linear positive  slope between  
size of attack surface (number  of IP addresses)  and exposure  to ser- 
vices of concern.  Then, in states where 1000–2000  IP addresses  are 
managed  at the county level, we see a sharp decrease  in slope, almost 
to an horizontal  line. More county infrastructure  does not make the 
state more exposed  at this stage. At a certain size of attack surface,  
IT admins are somewhat  successful  in maintaining  an equilibrium  
between  size of IT to manage  and exposure  to attacks.  But as com- 
plexity increases  and the attack surface expands,  there is almost an 
exponential  slope. Two states get rapidly exposed  to potentially  seri- 
ous attacks when the IP count crosses the 2000 mark, showing  how 
a large digital footprint  may lead to high complexity  and difficulty  
navigating  the potential  risks. 
We then broke down service exposure  across these four services  of 
concern  to see which states are more/less  susceptible  to which types 
of attacks.  For each service of concern,  we calculated  the percentage  
of counties  that are potentially  susceptible  to exploitation  through  
that service.  Figure 13 shows potential  vulnerability  to DNS miscon-  
figuration  attacks.  The states of California  and Virginia  were found 
to be at potentially  high risk for this type of attack, with more than 
75% of their counties  exposing  services  that could be exploited  for 
DNS misconfiguration.  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
12 Harry et al. 
Figure 11. Alaska and Hawaii colored based on their exposure  to 0–4 types of attacks. 
Figure 12. Sum of IP addresses  versus amount of services of concern exposed  at the state level. 
Figure 14 shows potential  vulnerability  to illicit access to govern-  
ment databases.  The states of Virginia  and Tennessee  were found to 
be at potentially  high risk for this type of attack, with respectively  
75% and 50% of their counties  exposing  services  that could be ex- 
ploited for illicit data access. 
Figure 15 shows potential  vulnerability  to insecure  authorization  
to government  infrastructures.  For most states, more than 50% of 
their counties  are potentially  vulnerable  to insecure  remote autho- 
rization  by an adversary,  due to the high number  of remote access ser- 
vices they expose on the public Internet.  Virginia  with almost 100% 
of its counties,  followed  by California  and Florida with around 75% 
of their counties,  are leading the list, highlighting  the importance  of 
properly  applying  two-factor  authentication  and strong password  for 
county government  infrastructures.  
Figure 16 shows potential  vulnerability  to insecure  file sharing.  
We were encouraged  to learn that most counties  do not expose the known-to-be-vulnerable  SMB and NETBios  services,  with Arizona  
being an outlier, with around 25% of its counties  exposing  those 
dangerous  services  in the wild. 
Attack  surface  severity:  amount,  variation,  severity,  
and probability  of exploitation  in exposed  CVEs 
Next, we wanted  to develop  CVE-based  measures  for the attack sur- 
face and understand  variations  in the amount,  severity,  and likelihood  
of exploitation  of CVEs across counties.  Our dataset with regards  to 
county CVEs is more limited,  covering  1003 counties,  about a third 
of all US county governments.  Beyond  the limitation  of missing  coun- 
ties without  domain  names (34) or counties  for which we could not 
retrieve  IP addresses  for (15), we have no CVE data for domains  with 
IPs but without  open ports (12), domains  with IP addresses  and open 
ports but for which we get no CPEs (393), domains  that only include Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  13 
Figur e 13. P ercentage  of counties  within US states that are potentially  susceptible  to DNS misconfiguration  attacks. 
Figur e 14. P ercentage  of counties  within US states that are potentially  susceptible  to illicit data access. 
nonversioned  CPEs that we chose to omit (1232),  and domains  that 
only contain  CVEs that were classified  by Shodan  as “Unknown”
(2118).  Those limitations  left us with 1145 domains  with CVEs re- 
lated data, covering  1003 counties.  
In the sample Shodan  response  shown in Appendix  3 , of the three 
CPE returned  (two distinct  CPE strings),  only one of them presented  
with a CPE version.  In this example,  with the intent of higher vulnera-  
bility confidence  and with the goal of providing  an accurate  account-  ing for services  running  on county infrastructure,  the Microsoft  Win- 
dows CPE would not be carried through  our analysis.  This filter drop 
is further carried through  when CVE are generated  through  NIST 
queries,  but only for versioned  CPE, dropping  our covered  counties  
for this section from 3095 out of 3143 (98%), to 1003 out of 3143 
(32%). The source of this limitation  is missing  data from Shodan,  ei- 
ther on what CVEs are associated  with particular  CPE, or the supply 
of only nonversioned  CPEs for the majority  of county domains.  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
14 Harry et al. 
Figur e 15. P ercentage  of counties  within US states that are potentially  susceptible  to insecure  authorization.  
Figur e 16. P ercentage  of counties  within US states that are potentially  susceptible  to insecure  file-sharing.  
Across the 50 states + Washington  DC, we were able to collect, 
on average,  versioned  CVE data for 33.59%  of the counties  in each 
state, with the median  percentage  across states being 33.3% of the 
counties  covered  and a standard  deviation  (SD) of 18.17. While the 
percentage  of covered  counties  with CVE data varies between  states, 
the majority  of the states have 20%–40%  of their counties  covered.  
See the box plot of the distribution  of counties  with CVE data per 
state in Fig. 17 . Specifically,  for eight states, the majority  of the counties  are cov- 
ered, with the states of Wyoming  (100%),  West Virginia  (75%), and 
Wisconsin  (62%) having many counties  covered.  At the same time, 
10 states have less than 20% of its counties  with CVE data. Alaska 
has none, Atlanta  and Arizona  have less than 10%, and California,  
Colorado,  Connecticut,  Washington  DC, Delaware,  and Florida have 
less than 20% of their counties  covered  with CVE data. Sixteen states 
have between  20% and 33% of their counties  with CVE data, and Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  15 
Figur e 1 7. Bo x plot for the distribution  of co vered counties  with CVE data across states. 
Figur e 18. P ercentage  of counties  covered with CVE data across states. 
17 states have between  34% and 48% of their counties  covered.  Fig- 
ure 18 shows the percentage  of counties  covered  with (versioned)  
CVE data in each state. 
Beyond  a few outliers,  the distribution  of missing  data is almost 
evenly spread across the states, maintaining  the randomness  of the 
sample and allowing  us to still generalize  attack surface findings.  
Data are missing  completely  at random,  and the likelihood  of missing  
values is the same across the vast majority  of observations,  equally 
affecting  most states. 
CVE density 
In contrast  to our findings  with regards  to service-based  attack sur- 
face measurement,  the amount  of CVEs across counties  is not corre- 
lated with the level of population  in those counties.  The correlation  
coefficient  is 0.1737 and statistically  significant  at the 99% confi- 
dence level ( P -value < 2.2e-16).  
We then moved to investigate  “CVE density”for  each county, ag- 
gregating  CVE counts from all IP addresses  associated  with a county 
and dividing  that by the total number  of IP addresses  per county. We 
wanted  to get a sense of how vulnerable  counties  are per each IP ad- dress they manage.  Figure 19 visualizes  this measure  across counties,  
masking  the exact location  of counties,  while visualizing  the vulner- 
able regions.  927 counties  have up to 5 CVEs per IP address,  the 
remaining  76 have between  6 and 49(!) CVEs per county IP address  
(In some cases, a single IP address  running  a severely  outdated  op- 
erating system or software  version generates  a significant  number  of 
potential  vulnerabilities.  However,  it is important  to remember  that 
this analysis  is based on the data generated  from CENSYS  scans that 
report service responses,  which may or not be updated  after a patch. 
CVEs are identified  based on these service/software  versions.).  For 
five and above CVEs per IP address  the counties  are colored  with 
dark red. 498 counties  have less than 0.5 CVE per IP address  and are 
colored  green, and 427 counties  are in between  0.5 CVE per IP and 
5 CVEs per IP, colored  from yellow to orange in the map. Regions  
colored  white are regions with missing  CVE data, or regions that are 
geographically  large on the map and colored  just by a single dot to 
mask exact location.  
We can see high density of CVEs along the Southern  parts of the 
Mississippi  river all the way up to Iowa, in parts of FEMA regions #4, 
#6, and #7, especially  in Louisiana,  Mississippi,  Tennessee,  Atlanta,  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
16 Harry et al. 
Figure 19. CVE density (CVEs per IP address)  across US counties.  
and Montana.  Following  our finding about the lack of correlation  
between  total number  of CVEs and county population,  we also found 
very weak correlation  between  the density of CVEs and the overall IP 
address  count for each county. The correlation  coefficient  is −0.102 
and it is significant  at the 99% confidence  level ( P -value is .001132).  
Average  probability  of exploitation  
To understand  the likelihood  of exploitation  per county, we summa-  
rized the EPSS score for each CVE found in a county and divided  
that by the total number  of CVEs per county. The intuition  for this 
measurement  is that a county with just one CVE that is highly likely 
to get exploited  poses a greater risk than a county with many CVEs 
that are less likely to each get exploited.  Figure 20 maps US counties  
for which we have CVE data for (1003 counties)  according  to their 
probability  of exploitation  per CVE (0–1), masking  exact county lo- 
cation, while still showing  regional  areas of vulnerability  and adding 
important  nuances  to our CVE density mapping  from the previous  
figure. 
Counties  are colored  based on the average  probability  of exploita-  
tion of their exposed  CVEs. Dark red areas suggest a very high prob- 
ability, on average,  for CVE exploitation.  We can see that those coun- 
ties exist across the US, regardless  of how populated  a region is. 
Twenty  three counties,  including  counties  in VA, TX, NY, NE, MT, 
MO, KS, IL, AK, MI, IA, IN, CO, and SC suggest a potential  probabil-  
ity of exploitation  of 95%. Forty-eight  counties  in the USA suggest an 
average  probability  between  74% and 95% to get exploited.  These 
include counties  from both more or less populated  regions.  Sixty-four  
suggest a probability  between  50% and 68% to get exploited,  bring- 
ing us to 135 counties  in our data that face 50% probability  or more, 
on average,  to get exploited.  As can be seen in the dotted map, those 
orange to dark red counties  come from all over the nation. Populated  
regions that unsurprisingly  stood out in service-based  measurement  
of the attack surface do not necessarily  include CVEs that are highly 
likely to get exploited.  Many counties  in the east coast or the state of 
California  suggest a probability  of exploitation  that is 20% or lower. Overall,  664 counties  present a probability  of exploitation  that is 
less than 20%, with 388 of them suggesting  an average  exploitation  
probability  of less than 1%. Here again, and in contrast  to our find- 
ings with regards  to service-based  attack surface measurement,  the 
average  probability  of CVE exploitation  is not linked to the level of 
county population.  The correlation  coefficient  is 0.0464 and statisti-  
cally significant  at the 95% confidence  level ( P -value = .0246). 
We also explored  the relationship  between  density of CVEs and 
probability  of exploitation  across counties.  We tested for correlation  
between  CVE count per IP and EPSS score per CVE for each county. 
We found that for all counties  that are above the CVE density me- 
dian (0.5), the Pearson  correlation  value is ( −0.141) at the 99% con- 
fidence level ( P -value is .00309).  This is a very weak but statistically  
significant  lack of correlation  between  density of CVEs and proba- 
bility of exploitation,  showing  that above 0.5, the number  of CVEs 
per IP is not related to the probability  of exploitation,  stressing  the 
need to patch “smart,”rather  than patch everything.  
Quantification  of cyber risk per county 
Mapping  exposed  infrastructure,  their associated  CVEs, and the re- 
lated CVSS and EPSS score for each, allows for the estimation  of 
risk across counties.  By definition,  risk is a product  of severity  and 
probability.  For each CVE found in a county, we use its CVSS score 
as a proxy for severity  and EPSS score as a proxy for its probabil-  
ity. We then calculate  the average  CVSS score across all CVEs found 
in a county and multiply  that by the average  EPSS score across all 
CVEs found in a county. This computation  produces  a (0–10) risk 
score per county. The resulting  products  are mapped  geographically  
to provide  a visualization  of risk across counties,  states, and regions 
(see Fig. 21 ). 
Every CVE has an associated  CVSS score from 0 to 10 based 
on its exploitability  and impact on the target system.  Factors  such 
as the attack vector (remote  versus local), attack complexity,  privi- 
leges required,  user interaction,  and the potential  of the vulnerability  
to affect the confidentiality  , integrity  , and availability  of the target Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  17 
Figure 20. Average  exploitability  probability  per CVE across US counties.  
Figure 21. Risk quantification  for each county across the US. 
system are all taken into account.  Multiplying  that by EPSS, the re- 
sult is a quantification  of the cyber risk posed by each county, based 
on the computation  of risk as: [severity  (average  CVSS)] ∗[probabil-  
ity (average  EPSS)] for each county. 
Figure 21 shows the spread of risk based on our metric across 
counties.  To mask exact county location,  we used dotted marks in- 
stead of exact county borders/locations,  showing  only the approxi-  
mate area of vulnerability.  829 counties  have less than 1.0 risk score 
and are colored  green on the map. 89 counties  have a score between  1.0 and 2.0 and are colored  light green; 52 counties  have a risk score 
between  2.0 and 3.0 and are colored  yellow; 3 counties  have a score 
between  3.0 and 6.0 and are orange on the map; and 23 counties  
have a risk score of more than 9.0 and are colored  dark red. The 
average  risk score across counties  is 0.586 and the median  score is 
0.0817.  
The counties  that pose the greatest  risk are spread across the na- 
tion, with correlation  coefficient  between  risk score and county pop- 
ulation is −0.06 that is statistically  significant  at the 94% confidence  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
18 Harry et al. 
level ( P -value is .059). Again, as opposed  to service-based  attack sur- 
face measurement,  risky counties  are not correlated  with population  
levels, suggesting  other contexts  for county vulnerability  that require 
further investigation.  
Counties  that require immediate  attention  
Importantly,  not all identified  vulnerabilities  are of equal concern.  In 
many cases vulnerabilities  require direct physical  access to devices,  
are theoretical  and have yet to be paired with specific code to take ad- 
vantage  or are found in services  not broadly  utilized.  Therefore,  map- 
ping all CVEs is likely to cloud the broader  set of concerns  among 
policymakers  who might be generally  concerned  about strategic  vul- 
nerability  in a county, state, or national  environment.  In our analy- 
sis, we found 852 unique CVEs across 1003 county governments.  Of 
those, six CVEs (0.7%) appear in CISA’s Known  Exploited  Vulner-  
abilities  (KEV) Catalog  representing  the federal government’s  areas 
of greatest  concern,  and ones likely to be leveraged  by threat actor 
groups (This is much lower than the known baseline  of 5% of ex- 
ploited CVEs from all publicly  known CVEs [ 49 ], but corresponds  
to the fact that we are examining  only a subset of potentially  vul- 
nerable  infrastructures—CPEs  that are remotely  accessible.).  Those 
six specific CVEs are found dispersed  across 19 different  counties.  In 
one specific California  county, we found five CVEs, raising serious 
concerns  about the ability of that county government  to manage  its 
potential  susceptibility  to attack. In the other 18 county governments,  
we find at least 1 CVE from CISA’s KEV catalog.  The counties  are 
generally  spread across the nation, in both populated  and less popu- 
lated regions.  This finding highlights  potential  areas where national,  
state, and local policymakers  can coordinate  and remediate  areas of 
greatest  concern.  
Discussion  and conclusion  
Existing  scholarship  on county government  cybersecurity  is method-  
ologically  limited,  challenging  policymakers  to make progress  in this 
space. Previous  studies rely on employee  surveys  and fail to assess 
the strategic  threat that county governments  pose at the state and 
national  levels. Therefore,  despite their importance  to national  re- 
silience,  we have no clear assessment  of the threat that county gov- 
ernment  cyber vulnerabilities  create, or a holistic,  practiced,  and con- 
sistent response  to such threats across the country.  
There is a mismatch  between  county government  technical  real- 
ities, and the funds allocated  at a national  or state level to address  
them. Our methodology  and research  results can bridge this gap. We 
rely and further develop  existing  OSINT-based  attack surface mea- 
surements  to assess county government  cybersecurity  vulnerability  
based on the scanning  of Internet-facing  infrastructures  and services  
of all county governments  across the nation, and aggregate  and vi- 
sualize the results at the state, FEMA region, and national  levels. We 
spot geographic  areas, where lack of county government  cybersecu-  
rity is accumulating,  potentially  impacting  national  cyber resilience.  
Enumerating  and assessing  the cyber attack surface exposed  by 
US county governments  reveal an attack surface that is driven by dis- 
parities  across counties,  states, and FEMA regions.  We have shown 
variations  in the amount  of IP addresses  and open ports available  
for exploitation  across counties  and demonstrated  how the size of 
the attack surface is driven by the size of the regional  population,  
with open ports and available  IP addresses  are positively  correlated  
as well. The quantity  of accessible  IP addresses  and open ports both 
drive the exploitation-size  of an attack surface.  These two counts 
tend to increase  and decrease  together  allowing  the degree of one to be a highly suggestive  proxy for the degree of the other. Greater  needs 
for online county and local services  create more opportunities  for at- 
tackers.  This trend holds when aggregating  size results to the FEMA 
region level as well. The entire southeast  part of the country  offers a 
larger county government  attack surface than other, less populated,  
FEMA regions.  
Following  our discussion  on the size of the attack surface,  we 
present first results on the diversity  and severity  of county gov- 
ernment  attack surfaces,  based on two types of measurements:  (1) 
service-based  and (2) CVE-based  severity  measurements.  We first 
present our rationale  for measuring  diversity  based on the availability  
of services  for exploitation.  Often overlooked  in regular CVE counts, 
open services  can point hackers  into misconfigured  software  or allow 
hackers  to launch their campaigns  based on stolen credentials.  This 
has been found to be the most common  attack vector for success-  
ful attacks,  and we present a first appreciation  of open services  for 
exploitation  at the county level. 
We present our service-based  attack surface measurement  scale, 
based on four well-known  attack vector scenarios.  Results echo the 
previous  trend. Greater  service exploitation  opportunities  exist for 
highly populated  areas, with the states of CA, VA, and FL show- 
ing particular  concerns.  FEMA region #4, in the southeast  of the 
USA, shows the greatest  vulnerability  and potential  for national  im- 
pact on US cyber resiliency.  We do see links between  highly popu- 
lated regions in the east and west coasts and high levels of service-  
based vulnerabilities,  but at the national  level, the eight US states of 
FEMA region #4—Atlanta,  Florida,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  
North and South Carolina,  and Tennessee  collectively  pose the great- 
est vulnerability  to service-based  attacks.  Overall,  we found larger 
urban/suburban  centers expose larger numbers  of people to cyber 
insecurity  risks. Rural communities,  however,  without  the same large 
demand  for digital services,  tend to have smaller service-based  attack 
surfaces.  
When testing the relationship  between  the amount  of infrastruc-  
ture to manage  and the existence  of exploitable  services,  an inter- 
esting trend emerges.  We showed  how under 1000 IP addresses  per 
state, service diversity  increases  with the amount  of IP addresses.  Be- 
tween 1000 and 2000 IP addresses,  we see a sharp decrease  in the 
slope, hinting that the infrastructure  in those counties  does not in- 
troduce  significantly  more opportunities  for attack. But above the 
2000 IP addresses  mark, the service-based  attack surface diversity  
expands  exponentially,  hinting at the difficulty  of IT managers  to 
navigate  larger digital footprints  by counties.  As the management  of 
IT infrastructure  becomes  more complex,  there is a certain fluctua-  
tion point from which counties  struggle  to keep it safe. The overall 
trend demonstrates  how diversity  exposure  increases  linearly  (from 0 
to 50 IP addresses),  then reaches  an equilibrium  (roughly  between  50 
and 2000 IP addresses),  only to explode  when complexity  increases  
(beyond  2000 IP addresses).  
When we break down states’ exposure  based on the type of attack 
they might be susceptible  to, DNS misconfiguration  and insecure  au- 
thorization  are risks across most US states, having more than 50% of 
their counties  susceptible  to such attacks.  We found that not all ser- 
vices are equally exploitable  across the nation—with  Virginia  stand- 
ing out as highly susceptible  to three out of four attack scenarios,  
and Arizona  exhibits  a much higher percentage  of exposure  across 
its counties  to attacks on its insecure  file sharing  services.  
We contrasted  these findings  with a CVE-based  measurement  of 
the attack surface.  We show a contrasting  trend for this measure-  
ment, as the total number  of CVEs is not correlated  with levels of 
population,  and the density of CVEs per IP address  in counties  is not 
correlated  with the overall count of IP addresses  available  in counties.  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  19 
CVE density varies across the nation and is very high across coun- 
ties in certain states, with three counties  from the same state holding  
49(!) CVEs per managed  IP address,  on average.  
We contrasted  that with the average  probability  of exploitation  
per CVE, and found 135 counties  that on average,  have more than 
50% probability  of getting hacked.  Again, the average  probability  
of exploitation  is not correlated  with population  levels and is not 
correlated  with CVE density for counties  that have more than 0.5 
CVE per IP address  (the median  of the CVE density distribution).  
This finding demonstrates  the urgent need to “patch smart”instead  
of patching  “everything.”
The CVE-based  attack surface measurement  shows no correla-  
tion with population  levels, Counties  that are less populated  appear 
as risky if not more, compared  to counties  that are heavily populated.  
The measure  enabled  us to recognize  19 counties  that need immedi-  
ate attention,  as their potential  CVEs appear in CISA’s KEV catalog.  
In contrast  to highly populated  regions that drove the size, complex-  
ity, and severity  of service-based  attack scenarios,  probability  of CVE 
exploitation  is as high for less populated  counties,  uncovering  the dif- 
ficulty to secure county-level  infrastructures  even for rural and small 
counties.  Our research  team is in the process  of finding and notifying  
appropriate  points of contact  for the most vulnerable  configurations  
discovered.  
CVE-based  measurement  of the attack surface has also enabled  
the quantification  of the risk posed by counties  based on the (sever- 
ity ×probability)  formula.  We recognized  23 counties  that introduce  
very high levels of risk, at the 9.0 out of 10.0 level, while the vast 
majority  of the counties  (829) present very low risk levels, up to 1.0 
out of 10.0. The risk score for counties  is not correlated  with county 
population  levels, suggesting  alternative  contexts  for CVE-based  vul- 
nerabilities  across counties.  
The results open an important  discussion  on how to cope with 
county government  attack surface to ensure national  resilience.  
Should we be guided by size, and shrink the exposed  services  to de- 
crease the size of the surface in highly populated  areas? Or should 
we hand pick our patching  efforts to close CVEs of exploits  that are 
already  visible in the wild, even for counties  with a small footprint?  
According  to the service-based  measure,  we found that large coun- 
ties have greater potential  vulnerability  and shrinking  the amount  
of exposed  services  would decrease  the chances  of service miscon-  
figuration  and increase  the security  of systems  in those regions.  At 
the same time, highly exploitable  CVEs sporadically  exist across the 
nation and might serve as an easy starting  point for threat actors, 
regardless  of county configurations.  Simply put, should we shrink 
large attack surfaces  as much as possible,  or patch specific CVEs in 
smaller networks?  What can make counties  good in one but not in 
the other? 
We argue that both service-  and CVE-based  measurements  of the 
attack surface are valid and help put county vulnerability  in context.  
The projected  effects of attacks on highly populated  counties  dif- 
fer from attacks on small county networks,  where lateral movement  
might be limited.  At the same time, unauthorized  access to smaller 
counties  might be easier due to lack of resources  and capacities  to 
properly  protect the residents.  Each type of exposed  vulnerability  
holds different  implications  for national  resilience,  and both should 
be jointly considered  in the effort to address  the integrated  attack 
surface exposed  by US county governments.  Minimizing  cyber risk 
can proceed  through  both risk measures,  each addressing  different  
types of threat actors on the one hand, and organizational  capacities  
within counties  on the other hand. The automation  and visualization  
of both measures,  over time, would help policymakers  direct their re- 
sources  based on the type of risk they aim to minimize.  Limitations  
Our results have a few important  limitations.  First, we have missing  
data for both service-  and CVE-based  attack surface measurements.  
Service-based  measurement  covers 98% of all US counties,  and as 
noted earlier, we are still missing  34 missing  county governments  for 
which we have no domains  and 15 county domains  without  IP infor- 
mation.  CVE-based  measurement  covers 32% of all counties,  with 
each state having between  20% and 40% of its counties  covered  with 
a few outliers  (see Section 4.4). The selection  bias does not impact the 
ability to generalize  from our results since data is missing  completely  
at random,  but we are working  to address  the sources  of those limi- 
tations,  which mostly come from Shodan’s  classification  of CVEs as 
“Unknown” for  CPEs that were identified  with their version.  Our 
plan is to bypass Shodan’s  CVE information  retrieval  by conducting  
direct queries to the NVD database  based on the versioned  CPEs that 
we get for each county. Direct NVD queries of single CVE proved to 
be, at the time, infeasible  with query limits and token access, but re- 
mains an open goal for future research  and possible  attack surface 
model improvements.  
Second,  we are only measuring  the publicly  exposed  attack sur- 
face, as identified  through  scans of the public Internet.  We have yet 
to complement  this measurement  through  interviews  with counties  
and get a more complete  picture of county networks.  Deeper assess- 
ment of individual  networks  might reveal more complex  attack sur- 
faces that would add greater fidelity to the analysis  presented  in this 
paper. 
Third, our results for the severity  of the attack surface represent  
a high bound of county vulnerability  and do not necessarily  deter- 
mine that county governments  are exposed.  For service-based  mea- 
surements,  our results are a high bound because  the county service 
might be properly  configured.  There is a wide set of configurations,  
such as two-factor  authentication  and forbidden  anonymous  access, 
that can be associated  with the exposed  services  and make the job of 
hackers  much more difficult.  For CVE-based  measures  our results are 
a high-bound  as well. County  systems  might be patched  without  an 
effect on CPE versions,  or old version CPEs might have been back- 
ported, so the given CVE indications  for the collected  CPEs might not 
reflect the actual vulnerability  status. In order to improve  our attack 
surface measurement,  we will need to be able to evaluate  the defense  
mechanisms  applied  by counties.  
Nonetheless,  it remains  urgent to pay attention  to the existence  
of the reported  CVEs collected  from the public Internet.  The OSINT-  
based tools used for this research  are available  to attackers  as well, 
who can conduct  large-scale  scans of vulnerable  county hosts within 
mere hours of a vulnerability  disclosure.  While their exploitability  de- 
pends on various  factors,  being aware of these vulnerabilities  would 
enable counties  and decision  makers to assess risks, take necessary  
measures  to reduce them, and actively  manage  vulnerabilities  to im- 
prove counties’  security  posture.  The exposure  of widely known vul- 
nerable  services  such as RDP, TELNET,  FTP, and SMB, or county 
CVEs that either appear in CISA’s KEV catalog or have a close to 
one EPSS score, or a high risk score, point to regional  areas that de- 
serve careful attention.  
Insights  for policymak  er s 
Our approach,  which quantifies  and explores  integrated  attack sur- 
faces across geographies,  is useful for policymakers  who struggle  
to determine  where to invest scarce resources.  Even though our at- 
tack surface measurements  suggest a high bound for county vulner- 
abilities,  they put a spotlight  on regions that require careful atten- 
tion and investment  of resources  to close the gaps. Locally  man- Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
20 Harry et al. 
aged infrastructures,  whose vulnerabilities  are not wholly under- 
stood can lead to misperceptions  of risk and limit the effectiveness  
of state or national  lawmakers  who seek to support  local govern-  
ment cybersecurity.  For example,  in the state of Maryland,  the 2022 
“Local Cybersecurity  Support  Act”(“The  Local Cybersecurity  Sup- 
port Act” provides  a sizable fund for state leaders to allocate  to 
local governments  to assist in the management  of risk to govern-  
ment networks,  thereby  providing  a mechanism  to actively  strate- 
gically manage  cyber risk at the local level [ 50 ].) provides  funding  
for state officials  to assist county and municipal  governments  in im- 
proving  their local cybersecurity.  However,  given the localized  na- 
ture of network  management,  those same policymakers  might strug- 
gle to identify  risks across all counties  and municipalities  in their 
state. By linking county geographies  with network  infrastructure,  ex- 
posed services,  and CVEs, our approach  allows state and national  
leaders to quantify  the size, scope, and depth of exposed  infrastruc-  
ture. This could help policymakers  assess the county government  
cybersecurity  risk in a more strategic  manner,  and invest resources  
accordingly.  
We provide,  for the first time, data and tools for US policymak-  
ers to grasp the scope of the problem,  across various  regional  levels, 
through  various  attack surface measures,  allowing  the prevention  of 
future harms. Our goal in this paper is to explain  our novel method-  
ology and demonstrate  its applicability  to the cyber risk management  
efforts of local and national  government  officials.  We view this as a 
continuous  effort for better assessing  and acting upon cybersecurity  
risks at the county level and their potential  national  impact.  The find- 
ings raise serious concerns  about the ability of county government  
officials  to address  the cybersecurity  threat that their digital infras- 
tructures  are creating,  calling for urgent funding  and a more careful 
management  of IT infrastructures  for US government  counties.  The 
data we chose to share here is only part of a much larger dataset that 
can help policymakers  reach evidence-based  decisions  on county gov- 
ernment  cybersecurity.  
More broadly,  our data and methodological  approach  have clear 
applications  for increasing  US cyber resiliency.  CISA for instance,  
as the national  cybersecurity  critical infrastructure  coordinator,  has 
been providing  alerts noting active exploitation  of exposed  services.  
For example,  Chinese  threat actors were observed  accessing  critical 
infrastructure  providers  supporting  military  facilities  in the US terri- 
tory of Guam [ 51 ]. Exploiting  the FOR TIGU ARD service,  Chinese  
state actors accessed  key infrastructure  that posed a significant  risk to 
US military  operations.  Applying  that specific example  in our dataset,  
we note that there are over 63 counties  potentially  susceptible  to the 
same approach.  National  policymakers  as well as state officials  utiliz- 
ing this approach  can more readily identify  exploitable  services  and 
direct emergency  actions to resolve the issue expeditiously.  
Future  research  
This project has opened a rich set of opportunities  for future re- 
search. First, we can expand  on attack surface variations  between  
sectors with counties,  exploring  various  critical infrastructures  man- 
aged by independent  organizations  but tied to specific geographies.  
For example,  instead of focusing  solely on county governments,  an 
analysis  that incorporates  hospitals,  transport  links, or schools  could 
provide  a more comprehensive  view of vulnerability  for a particular  
population.  We plan to query the various  domains  that were found 
through  collected  SSL certificates  by Censys to understand  the differ- 
ent types of county government  infrastructures  in our data. We also found clusters  of shared hosting  services  through  a single IP across 
various  counties,  making  a specific infrastructure  a single point of 
failure for many counties  at once. We aim to uncover  those ties and 
understand  who is vulnerable  to the same attack vector. Inevitably,  
our lack of access to county government  officials  thus far, prevents  
us from mapping  each county with greater precision.  We are now in 
the process  of working  with some state governments  to study county 
government  attack surfaces  with the counties  themselves  and under- 
stand when and how counties  rely on state infrastructures,  allowing  
for a potentially  richer and nuanced  understanding  of their attack 
surfaces,  as well as building  relationships,  practices,  tools, and pro- 
cedures  to best nationalize  vulnerability  identification  and response  
mitigation.  
Second,  we can further study the temporal  development  of the 
attack surface.  With regular data collection  contextualized  by sector 
(e.g. county government)  and geography,  there is an opportunity  to 
identify  not only where unverified  vulnerabilities  exist, but also how 
quickly  they might be resolved.  Given the concern  among policymak-  
ers about the speed at which vulnerabilities  in critical infrastructures  
are addressed,  this research  is likely to be welcomed  and can high- 
light where government  programs  may or may not support  broader  
strategic  cybersecurity  goals. Specifically,  analysis  about the temporal  
dimensions  of this approach  offers a rich area for exploration  with 
specific focus on the dynamic  nature of the attack surface itself. This 
expansion  would also enable an analysis  of adoption  of CISA recom- 
mendations  stemming  from its advisory  notification  services  to state 
and local officials.  
Our methodology  defines an approach  to leverage  publicly  acces- 
sible, or at least knowable,  information.  However,  as it relies on data 
“seen”from  outside the organization  it limits the ability for policy- 
makers to fully appreciate  the risks internal  to organizations  resid- 
ing throughout  an entire sector. This approach  could be augmented  
with internally  collected  data deemed  more sensitive  but available  to 
policymakers,  thereby  greatly improving  the conclusions  of the anal- 
ysis. More plainly, despite some limitations  this approach  provides  
an ability to aggregate  findings  through  the context  of sector and 
geography  while creating  opportunities  to supplement  it with infor- 
mation more closely protected  by policymakers  to expand  the quality 
and precision  of the risk analysis.  
Third, the paper can also serve as a starting  point for build- 
ing more sophisticated  measures  for attack surfaces  that allow for 
a scaled score displayed  across the country.  However,  how that score 
is constructed  warrants  further exploration,  with alternative  ap- 
proaches  identified  and tested to determine  better methods  for un- 
derstanding  security  at scale. For instance,  we plan to come up with 
more nuanced  and contextual  scores for the severity  of CVEs found 
in county government  networks.  We currently  rank vulnerable  in- 
frastructure  based on their open services,  and CVEs with certain 
CVSS and EPSS scores, but those existing  scales do not take into 
account  the aggregated  regional  and sectoral  contexts  of software  
vulnerabilities,  missing  important  aspects of their effects and sever- 
ity. Looking  ahead, we plan to merge the existing  risk quantification  
for CVE exploitation  with regional  and sectoral  variables  on county 
government  networks  and CPE indexes  and operating  systems  dis- 
tributions.  We plan to include additional  OSINT-based  datasets,  in- 
cluding  the ability to combine  exposed  services  with compromised  
credentials  found on the dark web to expand  our ability to make 
more nuanced  estimates  of risk, tying exposure  with access creden-  
tials and analyze  the ratio of known valid accounts  paired with open 
services.  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  21 
Conﬂict  of interest  
None declared.  
Funding  
None declared.  
Acknowledgments  
We are grateful for the valuable  research support provided  by Mr Parthav 
Poudel. We would like to thank Rishipal Yadav and Ann Daley for their 
support in earlier phases of the project. We are also thankful  to Mrs 
DeBrae Kennedy-Mayo  for her wonderful  comments  and feedback  pro- 
vided during the 2023 Cybersecurity  Law and Policy Scholars  Confer- ence, and anonymous  reviewers  who helped us significantly  improve the 
paper. 
Author  contributions  
Charles Harry (Conceptualization  [equal], Investigation  [equal], Methodology  
[equal], Project administration  [equal], Resources  [equal], Software  [equal], Su- 
pervision  [equal], Validation  [equal], Visualization  [equal], Writing – original  
draft [equal], Writing –review & editing [equal]),  Ido Sivan-Sevilla  (Conceptu-  
alization  [equal], Data curation  [equal], Formal analysis [equal], Investigation  
[equal], Methodology  [equal], Resources  [equal], Software  [equal], Supervi- 
sion [equal], Validation  [equal], Visualization  [equal], Writing – original  draft 
[equal], Writing –review & editing [equal]),  and Mark McDermott  (Conceptu-  
alization  [equal], Data curation  [equal], Formal analysis [equal], Investigation  
[equal], Methodology  [equal], Software  [equal], Validation  [equal], Writing –
review & editing [equal]).  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
22 Harry et al. 
Appendix  1: output  sample  from CENSYS  
>>> from censys.search  import CensysHosts  
>>> censys_hosts  = CensysHosts()  
>>> result_censys  = list(censys_hosts.search(query_term,  per_page  = 100, pages = 200)) 
>>> print(json.dumps(result_censys,  indent = 3)) 
[ 
[ 
{ 
"dns": { 
"reverse_dns":  { 
"names":  [ 
"xxx-xx-xx-xx-xxx.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com"  
] 
} 
}, 
"last_updated_at":  "YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSSZ",  
"autonomous_system":  { 
"country_code":  "US", 
"description":  "AMAZON-02",  
"bgp_prefix":  "1.2.0.0/14",  
"asn": xxxxx, 
"name":  "AMAZON-02"  
}, 
"ip": "1.2.3.4",  
"services":  [ 
{ 
"port": 80, 
"extended_service_name":  "HTTP",  
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"service_name":  "HTTP"  
}, 
{ 
"port": 443, 
"certificate":  "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx",  
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"service_name":  "HTTP",  
"extended_service_name":  "HTTPS"  
} 
], 
"location":  { 
"city": "some-city",  
"coordinates":  { 
"latitude":  0.000, 
"longitude":  0.000 
}, 
"country_code":  "US", 
"province":  "Oregon",  
"continent":  "North America",  
"country":  "United  States", 
"timezone":  "America/Los_Angeles",  
"postal_code":  "xxxxx"  
}, 
"matched_services":  [ 
{ 
"port": 443, 
"extended_service_name":  "HTTPS",  
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"service_name":  "HTTP",  
"certificate":  "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx",  
} Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  23 
Continued  
] 
}, 
{ 
"dns": { 
"reverse_dns":  { 
"names":  [ 
"xxx-xx-xxx-xxx-xxx.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com"  
] 
} 
}, 
"autonomous_system":  { 
"description":  "AMAZON-02",  
"bgp_prefix":  "1.2.0.0/11",  
"asn": xxxxx, 
"name":  "AMAZON-02",  
"country_code":  "US" 
}, 
"services":  [ 
{ 
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"service_name":  "HTTP",  
"extended_service_name":  "HTTP",  
"port": 80 
}, 
{ 
"port": 443, 
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"certificate":  "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx",  
"service_name":  "HTTP",  
"extended_service_name":  "HTTPS"  
} 
], 
"last_updated_at":  "YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSSZ",  
"ip": "1.2.3.4",  
"location":  { 
"country":  "United  States", 
"coordinates":  { 
"longitude":  -119.70058,  
"latitude":  45.83986  
}, 
"timezone":  "America/Los_Angeles",  
"postal_code":  "97818",  
"country_code":  "US", 
"city": "Boardman",  
"province":  "Oregon",  
"continent":  "North America"  
}, 
"matched_services":  [ 
{ 
"extended_service_name":  "HTTPS",  
"port": 443, 
"transport_protocol":  "TCP", 
"service_name":  "HTTP",  
"certificate":  "xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx",  
} 
] 
} 
] 
] Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
24 Harry et al. 
Appendix  2: output  sample  from SHODAN  
>>> import requests  
>>> STRING_SHODAN_ENDPOINT_BASE  = "https://internetdb.shodan.io/"  
>>> query_string_shodan  = STRING_SHODAN_ENDPOINT_BASE  + "1.2.3.4"  
>>> result_shodan  = requests.get(query_string_shodan).json()  
>>> print(json.dumps(result_shodan,  indent = 3)) 
sample 1: 
{ 
"ip": "1.2.3.4",  
"cpes": [ 
"cpe:/a:microsoft:internet_information_services:10.0",  
"cpe:/a:jquery:jquery",  
"cpe:/o:microsoft:windows",  
"cpe:/a:getbootstrap:bootstrap",  
"cpe:/a:microsoft:internet_information_services"  
], 
"hostnames":  [], 
"ports":  [80, 443], 
"tags": [ 
"cloud"  
], 
"vulns":  [] 
} 
sample 2: 
{ 
"ip": "1.2.3.4",  
"cpes":[  
"cpe:/o:microsoft:windows",  
"cpe:/a:microsoft:internet_information_services:7.5",  
"cpe:/a:microsoft:internet_information_services"  
], 
"hostnames":["domain.com","www.domain.com"],  
"ports":[80,443],  
"tags":[],  
"vulns":[  
"CVE-2010-3972",  
"CVE-2010-2730",  
"CVE-2010-1899"]  
} 
Appendix  3: output  sample  from NIST for CPE 
FROM SHODAN:  cpe:/a:getbootstrap:bootstrap  
Python Conversion:  
cpe.CPE(’cpe:/a:getbootstrap:bootstrap’).as_fs()  >> ’cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗’ 
Hyphen  conversion  to cpeName:  
https://services.nvd.nist.gov/rest/json/cves/2.0?cpeName  = cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:-:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗
{ 
"resultsPerPage":5,  
"startIndex":0,  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  25 
Continued  
"totalResults":5,  
"format":"NVD_CVE",  
"version":"2.0",  
"timestamp":"2023-12-06T11:30:50.280",  
"vulnerabilities":[  
{"cve":{  
"id":"CVE-2018-14040",  
"sourceIdentifier":"cve@mitre.org",  
"published":"2018-07-13T14:29:00.213",  
"lastModified":"2023-11-07T02:52:53.940",  
"vulnStatus":"Modified",  
"descriptions":[  
{"lang":"en","value":"In  Bootstrap  before 4.1.2, XSS is possible  in the collapse  data-parent  attribute."},  
{"lang":"es","value":"xxx"}  
], 
"metrics":{  
"cvssMetricV30":[  
{ 
"source":"nvd@nist.gov",  
"type":"Primary",  
"cvssData":{  
"version":"3.0",  
"vectorString":"CVSS:3.0  \ /AV:N \ /AC:L \ /PR:N \ /UI:R \ /S:C \ /C:L \ /I:L \ /A:N", 
"attackVector":"NETWORK",  
"attackComplexity":"LOW",  
"privilegesRequired":"NONE",  
"userInteraction":"REQUIRED",  
"scope":"CHANGED",  
"confidentialityImpact":"LOW",  
"integrityImpact":"LOW",  
"availabilityImpact":"NONE",  
"baseScore":6.1,  
"baseSeverity":"MEDIUM"  
}, 
"exploitabilityScore":2.8,  
"impactScore":2.7  
} 
], 
"cvssMetricV2":[  
{ 
"source":"nvd@nist.gov",  
"type":"Primary",  
"cvssData":{  
"version":"2.0",  
"vectorString":"AV:N  \ /AC:M \ /Au:N \ /C:N \ /I:P \ /A:N", 
"accessVector":"NETWORK",  
"accessComplexity":"MEDIUM",  
"authentication":"NONE",  
"confidentialityImpact":"NONE",  
"integrityImpact":"PARTIAL",  
"availabilityImpact":"NONE",  
"baseScore":4.3  
}, 
"baseSeverity":"MEDIUM",  
"exploitabilityScore":8.6,  
"impactScore":2.9,  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
26 Harry et al. 
Continued  
"acInsufInfo":false,  
"obtainAllPrivilege":false,  
"obtainUserPrivilege":false,  
"obtainOtherPrivilege":false,  
"userInteractionRequired":true  
} 
] 
}, 
"weaknesses":[  
{"source":"nvd@nist.gov","type":"Primary","description":[{"lang":"en","value":"CWE-79"}]}  
], 
"configurations":[  
{ 
"nodes":[  
{ 
"operator":"OR",  
"negate":false,  
"cpeMatch":[  
{ 
"vulnerable":true,  
"criteria":"cpe:2.3:o:debian:debian_linux:8.0:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗", 
"matchCriteriaId":"C11E6FB0-C8C0-4527-9AA0-CB9B316F8F43"  
} 
] 
} 
] 
}, 
{ 
"nodes":[  
{ 
"operator":"OR",  
"negate":false,  
"cpeMatch":[  
{"vulnerable":true,  "criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗", ...} 
{"vulnerable":true,  "criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗", ...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗", ...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha2:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha3:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha4:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha5:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:alpha6:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:beta:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:beta2:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
{"vulnerable":true,"criteria":"cpe:2.3:a:getbootstrap:bootstrap:4.0.0:beta3:  ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗: ∗",...} 
] 
} 
] 
} 
], 
"references":[  …] 
}}, 
{"cve":{"id":"CVE-2018-14042",  ... }}, 
{"cve":{"id":"CVE-2018-20676",  ... }}, 
{"cve":{"id":"CVE-2018-20677",  ... }}, 
{"cve":{"id":"CVE-2019-8331",  ... }} 
] 
} Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
Integrated  cyber attack surface  across US counties  27 
Appendix  4: output  sample  from NIST without  CPE query  
https://services.nvd.nist.gov/rest/json/cves/2.0?startIndex  = 0&resultsPerPage  = XXXX 
{ 
"resultsPerPage":  XXXX,  
"startIndex":  0, 
"totalResults":  240564,  
"format":  "NVD_CVE",  
"version":  "2.0", 
"timestamp":  "2024-03-05T15:08:36.657",  
"vulnerabilities":  [ 
{"cve": {"id": "CVE-1999-0095",  ... }} 
{"cve": {"id": "CVE-1999-0082",  ... }} 
... total of XXXX results …
] 
} 
References  
1.King A, Gallagher  M. Cyberspace  Solarium  Commission  Report . Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Congress,  2020.
2.Norris DF, Mateczun  L, Joshi A. et al. Cyberattacks  at the grass roots: 
American  local governments  and the need for high levels of cybersecurity.  
Public Adm Rev 2019; 79 :895–904.
3.Macmanus  SA, Caruson  K, Mcphee BD. Cybersecurity  at the local gov- 
ernment level: balancing  demands  for transparency  and privacy rights. J 
Urban Aff 2013; 35 :451–70.
4.Ponemon  Institute.  State of Cybersecurity  in Local, State & Federal Gov- 
ernment. , Traverse  City, MI, 2015.
5.Hatcher W, Meares WL, Heslen J. The cybersecurity  of municipalities  in 
the United States: an exploratory  survey of policies and practices.  J Cyber 
Pol 2020; 5 :302–25.
6.Norris DF, Mateczun  LK. Cyberattacks  on local governments  2020: find- 
ings from a key informant  survey. J Cyber Pol 2022; 7 :294–317.
7.Caruson  K, MacManus  SA, McPhee BD. Cybersecurity  policy-making  at 
the local government  level: an analysis of threats, preparedness,  and bu- 
reaucratic  roadblocks  to success. J Homeland  Secur Emer Manag 2012; 9 . 
https:// doi.org/ 10.1515/  jhsem- 2012- 0003 .
8.Sophos. The state of ransomware  in government  2021. Abingdon,  2021.
9.Preis B, Susskind  L. Municipal  cybersecurity:  more work needs to be 
done. Urban Aff Rev 2022; 58 :614–29.
10.Bagwe M. Cyberattack  on records vendor affects scores of US counties.  
Princeton,  NJ: BankInfoSecurity,  2023. https://www.bankinfosecurity.c  
om/cyberattack-  on- records- vendor- affects- scores- us- counties-  a- 20856 
(12 September  2024, date last accessed).
11.Marks J. A 2020 ransomware  attack is still harming  Bal- 
timore teachers.  Washington,  DC: Washington  Post , 2022. 
https:// www.washingtonpost.com/politics/  2022/04/  18/2020-ransom  
ware- attack- is- still- harming-  baltimore-  teachers/ (5 July 2023, date last 
accessed).
12.Caldarulo  M, Welch EW, Feeney MK. Determinants  of cyber-incidents  
among small and medium US cities. Govt Inf Quart 2022; 39 :101703.
13.DHS. Critical Infrastructure:  Long-Term  Trends and Driv er s and Their 
Implications  for Emergency  Management  . Washington,  DC: Department  
of Homeland  Security,  2011.
14.DHS. Cyber Risk Economics  Capability  Gaps Research  Strategy . Wash- 
ington, DC: Department  of Homeland  Security,  2018.
15.Federal Bureau of Investigation.  Internet Crime Report . Washington,  DC, 
2022.
16.Healey J. Measuring  policy effectiveness  of cyber defensibility  and deter- 
rence. Washington,  DC: Lawfare,  2024.
17.Lovric E, Moric Z, Redzepagic  J. et al. Detecting  security vulnerabilities  
on internet-connected  devices. In: Katalinic  B (ed.), DAAAM  Proceedings  . 
Vol. 1 . 1st edn. Vienna: DAAAM  International,  2023, 0103–10.18.Everson D. Cyber attack surface mapping  for offensive  security testing. 
Dissertation,  The Graduate  School at Clemson  University,  2023.
19.Klick J, Koch R, Brandstetter  T. Epidemic?  The attack surface of German 
hospitals  during the COVID-19  Pandemic.  In: Proceedings  of the 2021 
13th International  Conference  on Cyber Conflict (CyCon)  . Tallinn: IEEE, 
2021, 73–94.
20.Rathi J. Mapping  the attack surface of telecommunication  networks  from 
the public internet.  Stockholm:  KTH Royal Institute of Technology,  2023.
21.Pervez MH, Da ˘g H. Risk assessment  for critical infrastructure:  a novel 
approach  using OSINT Framework.  Authorea  2024. https:// doi.org/ 10.2 
2541/au.172114508.86122493/v1  .
22.Pereira AKF. Resilience  to cyber-attacks  in critical infrastructures  of Por- 
tugal. Lisboa: Edições Sílabo, 2021.
23.Ashley T, Gourisetti  SNG, Brown N. et al. Aggregate  attack surface 
management  for network  discovery  of operational  technology.  Comput 
Secur 2022; 123 :102939.
24.Howard  M, Pincus J, Wing JM. Measuring  relative attack surfaces.  In: 
Lee DT, Shieh SP, Tygar JD (eds), Computer  Security in the 21st Century . 
Boston, MA: Springer,  2005, 109–37.
25.Theisen C, Munaiah  N, Al-Zyoud  M. et al. Attack surface defi- 
nitions: a systematic  literature  review. Inf Softw Technol 2018; 104 
:94–103.
26.NIST. Security and Privacy Controls  for Information  Systems and Orga- 
nizations  . Revision  5. Gaithersburg,  MD: National  Institute of Standards  
and Technology,  2020.
27.Gatlan S. Hundreds  of devices found violating  new CISA federal agency 
directive.  Huntington  Station, NY: Bleeping  Computer,  2023.
28.US Census Bureau. Counties  and Statistically  Equivalent  Areas of the 
United States, Puerto Rico, and the Island Areas (2020). Census.gov.  
Suitland-Silver  Hill, MD, 2020.
29.GSA. A complete  list of .gov domains.  Washington  DC, USA. 2014. https: 
// 18f.gsa.gov/  2014/12/  18/a- complete-  list- of- gov- domains/ .
30.Censys. Exposure  Management  and Threat Hunting  Solutions.  2023. ht 
tps:// censys.com/  .
31.The White House. State and Local Government  . Washington,  DC.
32.Benton JE, Kincaid J. Counties  as Service Delivery  Agents: Changing  Ex- 
pectations  and Roles . 1st edn. Westport,  CT: Praeger, 2002.
33.FEMA.gov.  Regions,  States and Territories  . Hyattsville,  MD, 2022.
34.IANA. Service name and transport  protocol  port number registry. Los 
Angeles,  CA, 2023.
35.CISA. CISA Analysis:  Fiscal Year 2023 Risk and Vulnerability  Assess- 
ments . Washington,  DC, 2024.
36.DFIR. Buzzing on Christmas  Eve: trigona Ransomware  in 3 hours. The 
DFIR Report . 2024.
37.Lakshmanan  R. Apache OpenMeetings  web conferencing  tool exposed to 
critical vulnerabilities.  The Hacker News, 2023.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
28 Harry et al. 
38.Arghire I. Veeam patches critical vulnerabilities  in enterprise  products.  
SecurityWeek,  2024.
39.CloudFlare.  What is a DNS flood? | DNS flood DDoS attack. 2023.
40.Davis J. Healthcare  websites  flooded by fake requests in ongoing DDoS 
attacks. SC Media, 2023.
41.CISA. Progress  Software  releases security advisory  for MOVEit  transfer.  
Washington,  DC, 2023.
42.Toulas B. New Mirai malware  variant infects linux devices to 
build DDoS botnet. Huntington  Station, NY: Bleeping  Computer,  
2023.
43.CISA. #StopRansomw  are: BianLian  Ransomw  are Group . Washington,  
DC, 2023.
44.NJCCIC.  Remote Access: Open Ports Create Targets of Opportunity,  Un- 
due Risk . West Trenton,  NJ, 2017.
45.Chappell  B, Neuman  S. U.S. Says North Korea “directly  re- 
sponsible” for  WannaCry  ransomware  attack. NPR, 2017. https:// www.npr.org/  sections/thetwo-way/  2017/12/  19/571854614/u-s-s  
ays- north- korea- directly- responsible-  for- wannacry-  ransomware-  attack 
(28 June 2023, date last accessed).
46.Fruhlinger  J. WannaCry  explained:  a perfect ransomware  storm. Fram- 
ingham, MA: CSO Online, 2022.
47.Eset.com.  Vulnerability  CVE-2017-0144  in SMB exploited  by Wan- 
naCryptor  ransomware  to spread over LAN. Bratislava,  2017.
48.Microsoft.com.  Secure SMB Traffic in Windows  Server. Washington,  DC, 
2023.
49.Jacobs J, Romanosky  S, Adjerid I. et al. Improving  vulnerability  re- 
mediation  through better exploit prediction.  J Cybersecur  2020; 6 . https: 
// doi.org/ 10.1093/  cybsec/tyaa015  .
50.State of Maryland.  Legislation—SB0754.  Annapolis,  MD, 2022.
51.Microsoft  Threat Intelligence.  Volt Typhoon  targets US critical infrastruc-  
ture with living-off-the-land  techniques.  Washington,  DC: Microsoft  Se- 
curity Blog, 2023.
©The Author(s)  2025. Published  by Oxford University  Press. This is an Open Access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons  
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs  licence ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-  nc- nd/4.0/ ), which permits non-commercial  reproduction  and distribution  of the work, 
in any medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed  in any way, and that the work properly cited. For commercial  re-use, please contact 
journals.permissions@oup.com  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae032/7959399 by guest on 05 March 2025
