February 4, 2025 16 CommentsWho’ s Behind the Seized Forums
‘Cracked’  & ‘Nulled’?
The FBI joined authorities across Europe last week in seizing domain names for Cracked  and
Nulled , English-language cybercrime forums with millions of users that trafﬁcked in stolen data,
hacking tools and malware. An investigation into the history of these communities shows their
apparent co-founders quite openly operate an Internet service provider and a pair of e-commerce
platforms catering to buyers and sellers on both forums.
  3/5/25, 10:28 AM Who’s Behind the Seized Forums ‘Cracked’ & ‘Nulled’? – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/whos-behind-the-seized-forums-cracked-nulled/ 1/7In this 2019 post from Cracked, a forum moderator told the author of the post (Buddie) that the owner of the RDP  service was the
founder of Nulled, a.k.a. “Finndev .” Image: Ke-la.com.
On Jan. 30, the U.S. Department of Justice  said it seized eight domain names that were used to
operate Cracked, a cybercrime forum that sprang up in 2018 and attracted more than four million
users. The DOJ said the law enforcement action, dubbed Operation Talent , also seized domains
tied to Sellix , Cracked’ s payment processor .
In addition, the government seized the domain names for two popular anonymity services that
were heavily advertised on Cracked and Nulled and allowed customers to rent virtual servers:3/5/25, 10:28 AM Who’s Behind the Seized Forums ‘Cracked’ & ‘Nulled’? – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/whos-behind-the-seized-forums-cracked-nulled/ 2/7StarkRDP[.]io , and rdp[.]sh .
Those archived webpages show both RDP  services were owned by an entity called 1337
Services Gmbh . According to corporate records  compiled by Northdata.com , 1337 Services
GmbH is also known as AS210558  and is incorporated in Hamburg, Germany .
The Cracked forum administrator went by the nicknames “ FlorainN ” and “ StarkRDP ” on multiple
cybercrime forums. Meanwhile, a LinkedIn proﬁle  for a Florian M . from Germany refers to this
person as the co-founder of Sellix and founder of 1337 Services GmbH.
Northdata’ s business proﬁle for 1337 Services GmbH shows the company is controlled by two
individuals: 32-year-old Florian Marzahl  and Finn Alexander Grimpe , 28.
An organization chart showing the owners of 1337 Services GmbH as Florian Marzahl and Finn Grimpe. Image: Northdata.com.
Neither Marzahl nor Grimpe responded to requests for comment. But Grimpe’ s ﬁrst name is
interesting because it corresponds to the nickname chosen by the founder of Nulled, who goes by
the monikers “ Finn” and “ Finndev .” NorthData reveals that Grimpe was the founder of a German
entity called DreamDrive GmbH , which rented out high-end sports cars and motorcycles .
According to the cyber intelligence ﬁrm Intel 471 , a user named Finndev registered on multiple
cybercrime forums, including Raidforums  [seized by the FBI in 2022 ], Void[.]to , and vDOS , a
DDoS-for-hire service that was shut down in 2016 after its founders were arrested .
The email address used for those accounts was f.grimpe@gmail.com . DomainT ools.com  reports
f.grimpe@gmail.com was used to register at least nine domain names, including nulled[.]lol  and
nulled[.]it . Neither of these domains were among those seized in Operation Talent.
Intel471 ﬁnds the user FlorainN registered across multiple cybercrime forums using the email
address olivia.messla@outlook.de . The breach tracking service Constella Intelligence  says this
email address used the same password (and slight variations of it) across many accounts online3/5/25, 10:28 AM Who’s Behind the Seized Forums ‘Cracked’ & ‘Nulled’? – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/whos-behind-the-seized-forums-cracked-nulled/ 3/7A LITTLE SUNSHINE BREADCRUMBS
1337 SERVICES GMBH AS210558 CONSTELLA INTELLIGENCE CRACKED DOMAINTOOLS
DREAMDRIVE GMBH FINN ALEXANDER GRIMPE FINN@SHOPPY.GG FINNDEV FLORIAN FLORIAN
MARZAHL HRB 164175 INTEL 471 LUCAS SOHN NORTHDATA.COM NULLED— including at hacker forums — and that the same password was used in connection with dozens
of other email addresses, such as ﬂorianmarzahl@hotmail.de, and fmarzahl137@gmail.com .
The Justice Department said the Nulled marketplace had more than ﬁve million members, and
has been selling stolen login credentials, stolen identiﬁcation documents and hacking services, as
well as tools for carrying out cybercrime and fraud, since 2016.
Perhaps ﬁttingly , both Cracked and Nulled have been hacked over the years, exposing countless
private messages between forum users. A review of those messages archived by Intel 471
showed that dozens of early forum members referred privately to Finndev as the owner of
shoppy[.]gg , an e-commerce platform that caters to the same clientele as Sellix.
Shoppy was not targeted as part of Operation Talent, and its website remains online. Northdata
reports  that Shoppy’ s business name — Shoppy Ecommerce Ltd.  — is registered at an address
in Gan-Ner , Israel, but there is no ownership information about this entity . Shoppy did not respond
to requests for comment.
Constella found that a user named Shoppy registered on Cracked in 2019 using the email
address ﬁnn@shoppy[.]gg . Constella says that email address is tied to a Twitter/X account  for
Shoppy Ecommerce in Israel.
The DOJ said one of the alleged administrators of Nulled, a 29-year-old Argentinian national
named Lucas Sohn , was arrested in Spain. The government has not announced any other
arrests or charges associated with Operation Talent.
Indeed, both StarkRDP  and FloraiN have posted to their accounts on Telegram  that there were
no charges levied against the proprietors of 1337 Services GmbH. FlorainN told former customers
they were in the process of moving to a new name and domain for StarkRDP , where existing
accounts and balances would be transferred.
“StarkRDP  has always been operating by the law and is not involved in any of these alleged
crimes and the legal process will conﬁrm this,” the StarkRDP  Telegram account wrote on January
30. “All of your servers are safe and they have not been collected in this operation. The only
things that were seized is the website server and our domain. Unfortunately , no one can tell who
took it and with whom we can talk about it. Therefore, we will restart operation soon, under a
different name, to close the chapter [of] ‘StarkRDP .'”
This entry was posted on Tuesday 4th of February 2025 12:09 PM3/5/25, 10:28 AM Who’s Behind the Seized Forums ‘Cracked’ & ‘Nulled’? – Krebs on Security
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/02/whos-behind-the-seized-forums-cracked-nulled/ 4/7