Cyber Security  and Applications  2 (2024) 100031 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Cyber  Security  and Applications  
journal  homepage:  http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/cyber-security-and-applications/  
Cyber  security:  State  of the art, challenges  and future  directions  
Wasyihun  Sema Admass  a , ∗ ,Yirga  Yayeh  Munaye  b ,Abebe  Abeshu  Diro c 
a Department  of Information  Technology,  Assosa University,  Assosa, Ethiopia 
b Department  of Information  Technology,  Injibara University,  Injibara, Ethiopia 
c Department  of Cyber Security, RMIT University,  Melbourne,  Australia 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Cyber-security  
State-of-the-art  
Challenges  
Trends 
Future directions  a b s t r a c t 
Cyber security has become a very critical concern that needs the attention  of researchers,  academicians,  and 
organizations  to conﬁdentially  ensure the protection  and security of information  systems.  Due to the increasing  
demand  for digitalization,  every individual  and organization  faces continually  shifting cyber threats. This article 
provides  an overview  of the state of the art in cyber security,  challenges,  and tactics, current conditions,  and 
global trends of cyber security.  To stay ahead of the curve in cyber security,  we conducted  a systematic  review 
to uncover  the latest trends, challenges,  and state-of-the-art  in cyber security.  Moreover,  we address the future 
direction  of cyber security,  presenting  the possible  strategies  and approaches  to addressing  the increasing  cyber 
security threat landscapes,  the emerging  trends, and innovations  like Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  (AI) and machine  
learning  (ML) to detect and automate  cyber threat responses.  Additionally,  this article underlines  the importance  
of ongoing  adoption  along with collaboration  among stakeholders  in the cyber ecosystem.  
1. Introduction  
Indeed,  the internet  has undergone  explosive  growth  over the past 
few decades,  fundamentally  transforming  society,  the economy,  and 
critical infrastructure.  This digital revolution,  often referred  to as the 
"cyber civilization,"  has revolutionized  the way we communicate,  con- 
duct business,  and access information.  The speed and scale of this trans- 
formation  have made the Internet  an indispensable  source for infor- 
mation exchange  and a cornerstone  of modern  life [1] . People and or- 
ganizations  use technology  for business-critical  tasks such as banking,  
health sectors,  governments,  educational  sectors,  human resources  man- 
agement,  smart cities, and grid systems.  
Advances  in information  and communication  technology  and the 
need for quick access to information  have made these tasks more conve- 
nient to perform  and pose serious security  challenges  that must be ad- 
dressed  by all stakeholders,  from individuals  to governments  [2] . Due 
to the advancement  of technology  security  issues may be a risk to in- 
dividuals,  societies,  and organizations.  To mitigate  these security  chal- 
lenges, individuals,  organizations,  and societies  often employ  various  
measures,  including  cybersecurity  measures,  legal frameworks,  and ed- 
ucation  and awareness  campaigns  to promote  ethical behavior  and dis- 
courage  malicious  intent. Cybersecurity  is the protection  of individuals,  
societies,  organizations,  systems,  and technologies  from abnormal  ac- 
Peer review under responsibility  of KeAi Communications  Co., Ltd. 
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: bywasyihun@gmail.com  (W.S. Admass)  . tivity. Cybersecurity  is the maintenance  of the conﬁdentiality,  integrity,  
and availability  (CIA) of computer  resources  owned by one organization  
or connected  to another  organization’s  network  [3] . 
In a world where over 61 % of the industry  and social interactions  
occur online, ensuring  high-security  standards  is essential  to facilitate  
seamless,  eﬃcient,  and secure interactions  some of the key concepts  
to be considered  in ensuring  high-security  standards  is data protection,  
privacy  concern,  reliability  and availability,  and cyber security  [4] . Cy- 
bersecurity  has therefore  become  the number  one means of preventing  
cybercrime  and cyber-attacks  by maintaining  safe inter-industry  and so- 
cial interactions  [5] . 
Making  the internet  safer and protecting  internet  clients has become  
one of the most critical security  issues worldwide  [6] . As the digital land- 
scape continues  to expand  and integrate  with almost every aspect of our 
lives, ensuring  a secure online environment  has far-reaching  implica-  
tions for individuals,  businesses,  and nations  to improve  cyber security  
[7] . Internet  security  has become  an integral  part of the development  
of new technologies,  services,  and government  policies.  Fighting  cyber- 
crime requires  a comprehensive  and safer approach.  This means that 
cybercrime  does not occur with technical  measures  alone. It is critically  
important  that law enforcement  agencies  can eﬀectively  investigate  and 
prosecute  cybercrime  [8] . Many countries,  including  Ethiopia,  now have 
strict cybersecurity  laws to prevent  information  leaks. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csa.2023.100031  
Received  9 July 2023; Received  in revised form 25 September  2023; Accepted  1 October  2023 
Available  online 1 October  2023 
2772-9184/©2023  The Authors.  Publishing  Services  by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications  Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC 
BY-NC-ND  license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ) W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
Cybersecurity  is crucial in the modern  digital world because  nearly 
every part of our lives relies on technology  to maintain  social and 
economic  stability  and security.  Cyber-attacks  can have catastrophic  ef- 
fects, such as ﬁnancial  loss, reputational  harm, and even fatalities  in 
industries  with vital infrastructure,  like healthcare  and energy [9] . Cy- 
ber security  is used in small enterprises,  government  agencies,  military  
groups,  health care providers,  educational  institutions,  energy suppliers,  
and transportation  systems  to protect personal  data, secure vital infras- 
tructures,  and guarantee  the conﬁdentiality  and integrity  of sensitive  
information  [10] . 
Artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) and machine  learning  can be used for 
detecting  threats,  uncovering  network  vulnerabilities,  and reducing  IT 
workloads  [11] . In addition,  machine  learning  and artiﬁcial  intelligence  
(AI) can be used to automate  many of the tasks involved  in cybersecu-  
rity, such as intrusion  detection,  malware  analysis,  and vulnerability  as- 
sessment  [12] . This can free up security  professionals  to focus on more 
strategic  tasks. Organizations  are turning  to Machine  Learning  (ML) and 
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  (AI) as eﬀective  tools in their cybersecurity  armory  
to tackle more sophisticated  cyber threats.  We investigate  the enormous  
inﬂuence  of ML and AI on cybersecurity  and how they are altering  cyber 
defenses  [13] . However,  there are anti-machine  learning  (ML) attacks.  
In this paper, we discuss the challenges  of cyber security,  and future re- 
search direction  including  AI, machine  learning,  and other states of the 
art techniques  used to combat  cyber security  challenges.  
This article is organized  as Section  1) Introduction  to Cyber security,  
Section  2) Application  area of Cyber-security,  Section  3) State-of-the-  
art in Cyber Security,  Section  4) Related  Work, Section  5) Challenges  of 
Cyber Security,  Section  6) Opportunities  and future research  direction  
of cyber security,  and Section  7) conclusion.  
2. Application  area of cyber security  
Cyber security  provides  conﬁdentiality,  integrity,  and reliability  ser- 
vices for diﬀerent  areas by providing  defense  mechanisms,  intrusion  de- 
tection mechanisms,  and encryption  mechanisms  [14] . Since industry  
and social interaction  are highly dependent  on the internet,  cyber secu- 
rity is mainly applicable  in the following  areas. 
2.1. Cyber security  in smart grid 
The smart grid is the next generation  of power systems,  and by merg- 
ing cutting-edge  computing  and communication  technologies,  it is an- 
ticipated  to increase  the eﬃciency  and dependability  of future power 
systems  with renewable  energy supplies,  distributed  intelligence,  and 
demand  response.  With a reduced  level of response  time delay, the smart 
grid oﬀers clients speedy and improved  services,  allowing  for the eﬀec- 
tive implementation  of solutions  for the energy issue [2] . Cybersecurity  
is a critical concern  for smart grids due to the extensive  interconnec-  
tivity of electronic  devices  and communication  networks  in the power 
infrastructure.  Smart grids, which use digital technology  to optimize  the 
generation,  distribution,  and consumption  of electricity,  oﬀer numerous  
beneﬁts  such as improved  eﬃciency  and reliability  [15] . 
Smart grid technology  communication  networks  are mission-critical  
networks  for information  exchange  in energy infrastructure.  The main 
cybersecurity  goals for the smart grid are trust, integrity,  and conﬁden-  
tiality [16] . These goals of cyber security  can be achieved  by implement-  
ing authentication,  secure communication  protocol,  Monitoring  the net- 
work for suspicious  activity,  and encryption  [5] . Smart grid cybersecu-  
rity ensures  timely and reliable  access to and use of information  [2] . To 
maintain  trust, conﬁdentiality,  and integrity  in the smart grid system cy- 
ber security  can mitigate  the potential  dangers  and risks such as denial 
of service (DoS), advanced  persistence  threat (APTs),  and unauthorized  
access to data. Cybersecurity  emphasizes  how cyber-attacks  against  the 
Smart Grid can have negative  eﬀects, including  power outages,  ﬁnancial  
losses, and safety risks to improve  the Smart Grid’s online security.  In addition  to adopting  cutting-edge  authentication  and encryption  tech- 
niques,  improving  threat intelligence  and sharing,  conducting  routine  
security  assessments  and audits, and educating  stakeholders  on cyber 
security  awareness  and best practices  are also suggested  [1] . 
2.2. Cyber security  in vehicular  communication  
Cybersecurity  plays a critical role in vehicle communication  systems  
and infrastructures  that enable vehicle-to-vehicle  communication,  im- 
proving  road safety, traﬃc eﬃciency,  and passenger  comfort,  securing  
communication  channels  between  vehicles  and infrastructure  such as 
road units or traﬃc control centers,  securing  the software  and hard- 
ware components  of the vehicle itself, such as electronic  control units 
(ECUs),  sensors  and actuators,  protect the privacy  and personal  informa-  
tion of drivers and passengers  like Location,  Driving  Behavior,  Health,  
ensure the continuity  and availability  of vehicle communication  sys- 
tems, especially  in emergencies  where the system must prioritize  critical 
communications  over other modes of transportation  [17] . This includes  
not only performing  regular  testing and maintenance  of the system but 
also implementing  redundancy  and failover  mechanisms.  Cybersecurity  
in-vehicle  communications  are essential  to ensure the security,  privacy,  
and reliability  of the system and to maintain  the trust of users and stake- 
holders.  A holistic  and proactive  approach  is therefore  required  involv- 
ing all stakeholders  in the ecosystem,  including  automakers,  infrastruc-  
ture providers,  service providers,  regulators,  and users [11] . 
2.3. Cyber security  in smart city 
A smart city is an urban area that uses advanced  technology  and 
communication  infrastructure  to improve  the quality of life for its citi- 
zens. However,  the growing  reliance  on connected  systems  and devices  
in smart cities also creates signiﬁcant  cybersecurity  risks that must be 
addressed  to ensure the safety and privacy  of citizens  and the resilience  
of critical infrastructure.  Smart city cybersecurity  applications  protect 
critical infrastructure  such as power, water, transportation,  and com- 
munications;  protect connected  Internet  of Things (IoT) devices,  includ- 
ing sensors,  cameras,  and other Internet  of things (IoT) devices;  ensure 
citizen’s  privacy,  including  the personal  information  collected,  protect 
disaster  recovery  systems.  
2.4. Cyber security  in smart eHealth  system 
Internet  of Things (IoT) -based healthcare  applications  such as re- 
mote patient monitoring,  and smart health rely heavily  on internet-  
connected  devices  to collect health-related  data from various  sources  
such as medical  devices  and mobile apps. The combination  of the In- 
ternet of Things (IoT) and medical  devices  will improve  the quality 
of healthcare  services,  providing  continuous  medical  monitoring  and 
progress  reporting  on the status of patients  requiring  real-time  preven-  
tive intervention.  According  to the World Economic  Forum,  more than 
10 million  records  of all kinds were stolen, including  social security  
numbers,  patient medical  records,  HIV test results,  and personal  infor- 
mation of health care providers.  Attacks  in this sector have compro-  
mised an average  of 155,000  records,  and that number  could be higher, 
with reports of incidents  in which more than 3 million  of these medi- 
cal records  in 33 countries  were compromised.  Cyber security  is de- 
manded  to safeguard  sensitive  patient information  and defend against  
cyber threats that can harm individuals  and disrupt healthcare  services  
and maintain  secure communication  between  healthcare  providers  and 
patients  [ 10 , 2 ]. 
3. State of the art 
Cyber security  provides  a defense  mechanism  for computing  systems,  
networks,  and data against  unauthorized  access, use, or damage  and pro- 
tects society and the economy  from online threats that could jeopardize  
2W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
the conﬁdentiality,  integrity,  and availability  of various  sectors,  includ- 
ing business,  government,  the military,  healthcare,  education,  and en- 
ergy [14] . This section reviews  the current  conditions  and global trends 
of cyber security,  as well as the existing  security  measures  and tools. 
The current  cyber security  landscape  is characterized  by the regular  
emergence  of new types of cyber threats and trends which constantly  
sophisticated  and diverse  for both individuals  and organizations.  The 
most common  types of cyber threats in 2022 include  malware,  phishing  
attacks,  ransomware,  social engineering,  the threat against  data, threat 
against  availability,  disinformation  and misinformation,  supply chain 
targeting,  and distributed  denial of service (DDoS)  attacks [18] . These 
cyber-threats  can have various  impacts  on diﬀerent  application  areas, 
such as ﬁnancial  losses, operational  disruptions,  reputational  damages,  
legal liabilities,  physical  harm, or even national  security  risks. The level 
of digital resilience  varies from diﬀerent  industries  and regions  and in 
some countries,  industries  prepare  themselves  to mitigate  and control 
cyber threats.  However,  many businesses  still struggle  to implement  
eﬀective  cybersecurity  measures  and may remain vulnerable  to cyber- 
attacks.  To improve  cyber security,  companies,  and industry  uses secu- 
rity technologies  and techniques  such as intrusion  detection  and pre- 
vention  systems,  ﬁrewalls,  antivirus  software,  and encryption.  In addi- 
tion, businesses  are increasingly  implementing  best practices  including  
frequent  software  upgrades,  strict password  guidelines,  and employee  
cyber security  training  [19] . 
The global trends and signiﬁcance  of cyber security  are being rec- 
ognized  more widely,  which has prompted  the creation  of legal frame- 
works, international  collaboration,  and innovation  landscapes.  To im- 
prove cyber security  and safeguard  people’s  privacy,  industries,  govern-  
ments, educational  sectors,  and ﬁnancial  services  several nations  have 
passed laws and regulations.  Guidelines  and frameworks  have also been 
created  by international  organizations  like the United Nations  and the 
European  Union to advance  cyber security  and encourage  international  
collaboration  [5] . The cyber security  landscape  is always changing  in 
terms of innovation,  with new technology  and strategies  being created  
to combat  new threats.  Blockchain  technology  is being investigated  for 
safe data storage  and sharing,  while artiﬁcial  intelligence  and machine  
learning  are being leveraged  to improve  threat detection  and response,  
cloud computing,  and quantum  computing  are also emerging  technolo-  
gies that oﬀer both opportunities  and challenges  for cyber security.  
4. Related  work 
The study conducted  by [20] provides  a comprehensive  overview  
of the use of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) in cybersecurity  and discusses  
the challenges  and opportunities  of using artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) in 
cybersecurity.  The researcher  discusses  the potential  of Artiﬁcial  intel- 
ligence to address  cybersecurity  challenges  and the area of AI for cy- 
bersecurity,  including  the use of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) for anomaly  
detection,  intrusion  detection,  and malware  analysis.  It then discusses  
the challenges  and opportunities  of using artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) in 
cybersecurity,  including  the need for big data, the risks of attackers  us- 
ing artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI), and the need for human oversight.  The 
article concludes  with a discussion  of the future of AI in cybersecurity  
and how artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) can be used to make cybersecurity  
more eﬀective.  
The researcher  [21] Conducted  a comprehensive  overview  of the use 
of AI in cyber security  and discussed  the challenges  of smart health 
and cybersecurity,  including  increasing  data volumes  and complexity,  
shortages  of skilled professionals,  and rising healthcare  costs. The re- 
searcher  examines  the potential  of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) to address  
these challenges  of cyber security  in health care and how to use artiﬁ- 
cial intelligence  (AI) for Smart health and cyber security.  The researcher  
discusses  the challenges  and opportunities  of using artiﬁcial  intelligence  
(AI) in smart health and cybersecurity,  including  the need for big data, 
the risks of attackers  using artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI), and the need for 
human oversight.  The study conducted  by Gunduz  and Das [2] discusses  the threats 
and potential  solutions  of cyber security  on smart grids. The researcher  
discusses  cyber threats such as denial of service (DoS) attacks,  malware  
attacks,  phishing  attacks,  and insider attacks and proposes  solutions  for 
cyber security  threats the smart grid faces. Some of the potential  solu- 
tions discussed  by the researcher  are implementing  security  measures,  
and educating  employees  about cybersecurity  threats and solutions.  
Zhang et al. [20] researched  to detect cyber security  threats in In- 
ternet of Things (IoT) devices  using Deep learning  approaches.  The re- 
searcher  discusses  the use of deep learning  for cyber security  threat de- 
tection and proposes  a combined  deep learning  approach  for detecting  
pirated  and malware-infected  ﬁles across Internet  of Things (IoT) net- 
works and achieving  better classiﬁcation  performance  with an accuracy  
of 97.46 %. 
Abbas et al. [22] Discuss  the valuable  contribution  of AI in cyber 
security  to prevent,  detect, and mitigate  cyber threats.  The researcher  
identiﬁes  the role, state of the art, and opportunities  of using AI in cyber 
threat mitigation  the use of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) in malware  detec- 
tion, Network  Intrusion  detection  systems,  Vulnerability  scanning,  risk 
assessment,  and security  automation.  The study is conducted  based on a 
comprehensive  study to present  the use of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) in 
cyber security  to automate  tasks, improve  decision-making,  and detect 
threats more eﬀectively  than traditional  methods.  
HaddadPajouh  et al. [23] also researched  the Internet  of Things 
(IoT) threat hunting  for malware  detection  using deep recurrent  neural 
network  approaches.  The researcher  was disappointed  with traditional-  
based malware  detection  which is no longer eﬀective  due to the rapid 
growth  of malware  and they propose  a deep neural network  (DNN) to 
train the patterns  of normal  and malicious  applications  in Internet  of 
Things (IoT) devices.  The researcher  concludes  that the proposed  model 
is more accurate  than traditional  signature-based  methods  to detect mal- 
ware in Internet  of Things (IoT) devices.  But the author does not con- 
sider the impact of evasion  techniques  which makes the malware  more 
diﬃcult  to detect by traditional  signature-based  methods  and it is also 
diﬃcult  to detect by the proposed  DRNN models and the approaches  
need to be evaluated  on diﬀerent  Internet  of things (IoT) devices.  
Liew et al. [24] proposes  a novel methodology  for analyzing  the 
safety and security  of cyber-physical  systems  by utilizing  custom  met- 
rics. To ensure a more in-depth  safety and security  investigation,  the 
researcher  proposes  an approach  that makes use of Systems-Theoretic  
Process  investigation  (STPA),  a top-down  hazard analysis  tool, and cus- 
tomized  matrices.  The researcher  wants to solve the limitations  of STPA 
by integrating  STPA and Custom  metrics.  STPA is used to ﬁnd risky con- 
trol scenarios  that might result in unintended  losses. The possibility  for 
these scenarios  to be utilized  by bad actors is then examined  using the 
custom  matrices.  
Alshehri  [6] conducted  research  on blockchain-assisted  cyber secu- 
rity for the medical  Internet  of Things (IoT) using artiﬁcial  intelligence.  
The researcher  discusses  the potential  of artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) and 
blockchain  to improve  cyber security  in medical  IoT. The authors  con- 
tend that artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) used to recognize  and stop cyber- 
attacks by identifying  patterns,  and blockchain  can oﬀer a safe and un- 
hackable  mechanism  to store and exchange  medical  data. 
Yazdinejad  et al. [25] propose  an ensemble  deep learning  model to 
detect anomalies  in the industrial  Internet  of Things (IIoT) data using 
learning  long-term  data relationships,  whilst the AE model is used to 
decrease  data dimensionality  and highlight  key features.  To test the 
model the researcher  uses two real-world  industry  Internet  of Things 
(IoT) datasets.  The ﬁrst dataset was for a gas pipeline,  while the sec- 
ond was for water treatment.  The model achieved  99.3 % accuracy  on 
the gas pipeline  dataset and 99.7 % accuracy  on the water treatment  
dataset.  
Mahajan  et al. [26] conducted  research  on the use of blockchain  
technology  to secure cloud-based  health data records.  The blockchain  
is an immutable  and tamper-proof  distributed  ledger. This implies  that 
electronic  health records  (EHRs) recorded  on the blockchain  cannot be 
3W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
changed  or removed  without  the permission  of all network  participants.  
A smart contract  is used to interface  the blockchain  with the electronic  
health records  (EHR) system.  A smart contract  is a self-executing  con- 
tract that is kept on the blockchain.  The smart contract  is used to limit 
access to electronic  health records  (EHRs) and to ensure that electronic  
health records  (EHRs) are only shared with authorized  users. The re- 
searcher  evaluates  the proposed  model using the real-time  electronic  
health records  (EHRs) dataset to achieve  a high level of accuracy  on 
the security  and safety of electronic  health records  (EHRs) data on the 
cloud. 
Dykstra  et al. [27] researched  to investigate  the economic  beneﬁts  
organizations  could gain from receiving  and processing  cyber threat 
intelligence  (CTI) supplied  by the United States government.  The re- 
searcher  uses a theoretical  model to demonstrate  how the advantages  
of receiving  CTI are directly  related to the diﬀerence  between  the dan- 
ger level indicated  by the CTI and the receiving  organization’s  prior as- 
sumption  about the threat level. According  to the authors’  results,  gov- 
ernment  entities  shouldn’t  prioritize  providing  CTI relating  to vulner-  
abilities  with the greatest  danger rating. Instead,  government  agencies  
should concentrate  on disseminating  CTI which is most likely to have 
the biggest impact on businesses  that have lower prior views about the 
danger level. 
Lonergan  [28] has researched  the power of beliefs on US cyber strate- 
gies and the researcher  employed  a qualitative  approach  to examine  the 
evolution  of views about military  cyber capability  in the United States. 
They concentrated  on a decade of US defense  cyber plans, beginning  
with the 2011 Strategy  for Operating  in Cyberspace  and ending with the 
2020 Cybersecurity  and Infrastructure  Security  Agency  (CISA) Strategy  
for Securing  the Nation’s  Critical  Infrastructure.  The author conducted  
the research  to identify  the key themes and gaps in US cyber strategy  
and compare  the thematic  area of cyber strategy.  
5. Methodology  
5.1. Criteria  for paper eligibility  selection  process 
This systematic  review is conducted  based on Preferred  Reporting  
Items for Systematic  Reviews  and Meta-Analyses  statement  [29] and 
the search is conducted  from 2013 up to 2023. Due to the large num- 
ber of papers published  in reputable  journals,  we consider  papers pub- 
lished within 10 years. In addition,  we consider  papers published  in 
peer-reviewed  journals  written  in English.  Finally,  we only include  pa- 
pers that are related to cyber security,  the application  of Cyber security,  
and the Challenges  of cyber security.  
5.2. Information  sources 
Using multiple  databases  is a common  and eﬀective  approach  to en- 
suring comprehensive  coverage  of the literature  on a speciﬁc  topic, like 
cybersecurity.  In this case, we have chosen four databases:  IEEE Xplore,  
Scopus,  SpringerLink,  and Web of Science.  This is a good selection,  as 
these databases  cover a wide range of academic  sources  related to your 
topic. 
5.3. Search 
When we conduct  a literature  search across multiple  databases,  it’s 
essential  to develop  a systematic  search strategy,  including  relevant  key- 
words, Boolean  operators,  and inclusion/exclusion  criteria.  Addition-  
ally, consider  using reference  management  tools to organize  and man- 
age the articles  you ﬁnd during your search. In this article, we use rele- 
vant keyword-searching  mechanisms.  We collected  200 papers through  
search keyword  (search  string) methods.  5.4. Selection  process 
To manage  the large number  of search results,  we conducted  an ab- 
stract analysis  to determine  the relevance  of each article. The criterion  
for relevance  was whether  the abstract  indicated  that the article related 
to cybersecurity.  If the abstract  mentioned  addresses  the causes or im- 
pacts of cyber risks and measures  in the area of cybersecurity,  the article 
passed this initial screening.  After initial screening,  we reduced  the ar- 
ticles from 200 to 40. After we reduced  the articles,  we conducted  a full 
review.  The selected  40 articles  were read in their entirety.  This compre-  
hensive  review allowed  for a more in-depth  assessment  of each article’s  
content.  
6. Challenges  of cyber security  
In the digital era, cyber security  is a critical concern  for people,  cor- 
porations,  and governments.  With the increased  use of technology  and 
digital devices,  it is more necessary  than ever to secure electronic  de- 
vices, networks,  and data against  unwanted  access, theft, and damage.  
With the advancement  of technology,  the cybersecurity  action of pro- 
tecting an organization,  employees,  and critical assets from cyber threats 
faces several challenges.  In this article, we will discuss the challenges  
faced by the cybersecurity  industry  and the future directions  that can 
help address  these challenges.  
6.1. Sophisticated  nature of cyber-attacks  
The complex  nature of cyber-attacks  to gain unauthorized  access to 
computer  systems  and networks  poses a signiﬁcant  challenge  in the area 
of cyber security  [30] . Intruders  (cyber attackers)  develop  and employ  
very sophisticated  and advanced  techniques  to gain unauthorized  access 
or exploit vulnerabilities.  Some of the complex  cyber-attacks  that use 
more advanced  techniques  to breach defenses  and exploit a vulnerability  
are multi-vector  attacks,  Polymorphic  and Fileless  Malware,  zero-day  
exploits,  and advanced  persistent  attacks [9] . 
Advanced  persistent  threats (APT):-  are sophisticated,  targeted,  and 
organized  attack that speciﬁcally  targets the diplomatic,  information  
technology  industry,  Military  services,  chemical  industries,  and other 
sensitive  areas to ﬁlter conﬁdential  information  and damage  the tar- 
geted industry  or area through  maintaining  persistence  using diﬀerent  
ways [31] . The APT is a state-sponsored  attack by governments  and or- 
ganized  criminal  groups to get economic,  political,  and strategic  advan- 
tages by stealing  information  and resources  from critical infrastructure  
and industries  such as diplomats,  national  defense,  government  insti- 
tutes, manufacturing  industries,  military  plans, and other sensitive  areas 
[32] . One of the APT attacks was the “Aurora  operation  ”a sophisticated  
cyber-attack  that happened  in 2009 that targeted  technology  companies  
and IT industries  such as Google,  Adobe, Juniper  Networks,  and others. 
The attack was very complicated  and used very advanced  techniques  to 
steal intellectual  property  and break into the networks  of the targeted  
technology  companies  and organizations  [ 32 , 31 , 30 ]. 
Zero-day  exploits  are attacks that target newly discovered  vulnera-  
bilities that software  developers  have not yet addressed.  Organizations  
become  susceptible  when attackers  sell or use these vulnerabilities  be- 
fore they are found or ﬁxed. Advanced  threat intelligence,  behavior-  
based analysis,  and prompt  software  patching  are necessary  for identi- 
fying and thwarting  zero-day  exploits.  [33] . The vulnerability  attacks of 
the zero-day  exploit have divided  their cycle into ﬁve stages, 
■Zero-Day  Attacks  : These are the initial attacks that exploit vulner-  
abilities  that are not known to the public or the software/hardware  
vendor.  These vulnerabilities  are typically  discovered  by malicious  
actors (black hat hackers),  and they do not disclose  them to the pub- 
lic or the aﬀected  party. Example:  - Stuxnet  was a highly sophisti-  
cated computer  worm that targeted  supervisory  control and data ac- 
quisition  (SCADA)  systems,  particularly  those used in Iran’s nuclear  
4W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
facilities  [10] . It exploited  multiple  zero-day  vulnerabilities  to gain 
access and manipulate  industrial  systems,  causing  physical  damage  
to centrifuges  used in uranium  enrichment.  
■Pseudo-Zero-Day  Attacks  : Pseudo-zero-day  attacks occur when the 
exploit is still relatively  unknown,  but it may have been discov- 
ered by a limited number  of attackers.  The vulnerability  may not 
be widely publicized,  but it’s not as closely guarded  a secret as in 
the ﬁrst stage. 
■Potential  for Pseudo-Zero-Day  Attack : At this stage, there may be 
indications  or clues that a vulnerability  exists, but it hasn’t been 
widely exploited  yet. Security  researchers  or organizations  might 
suspect  the presence  of a vulnerability  based on unusual  or suspi- 
cious activities.  
■Potential  for Zero-Day  Attacks  : In this stage, details about the 
vulnerability  have been made public. This might happen  when a 
security  researcher  or a responsible  disclosure  process  informs  the 
aﬀected  party about the vulnerability,  or it might become  known 
through  other means. Automated  attack code or programs  for ex- 
ploiting  the vulnerability  may start to appear,  making  it more acces- 
sible to attackers.  
■Passive  : This stage refers to the period after a vulnerability  has been 
discovered,  disclosed,  and patched  by the vendor or mitigated  in 
some way. During this time, the vulnerability  is no longer a zero-day,  
and organizations  are expected  to apply patches  or countermeasures  
to protect their systems.  
Zero-day  attacks are indeed challenging  to detect because  they target 
vulnerabilities  that are unknown  to defenders,  making  them like invis- 
ible arrows.  Detecting  and defending  against  such attacks often require  
proactive  security  measures,  intrusion  detection  systems,  and rapid re- 
sponse to newly discovered  vulnerabilities  once they become  known.  
6.2. Internet  of Things (IoT) security  
The Internet  of Things (IoT) is an emerging  technology  that connects  
billions  of computing  devices  with the Internet.  The Internet  of Things 
(IoT) interconnects  sensors,  and computer  devices  with Internet  proto- 
cols to exchange  information  and share data [2] . The Internet  of Things 
(IoT) presents  numerous  serious cybersecurity  concerns  as a result of its 
vulnerabilities  [34] . 
Device vulnerability  Internet  of Things (IoT) devices  are cre- 
ated with minimal  processing  power and memory,  rendering  them 
vulnerable  to security  ﬂaws. Weak default conﬁgurations,  obsolete  
ﬁrmware/software,  and a lack of security  upgrades  can make devices  
ideal targets for cyber-attacks  [34] . 
Data Privacy  in Internet  of Things devices  captures  and communi-  
cates massive  volumes  of sensitive  data, including  personal  information.  
It is critical to protect the privacy  and conﬁdentiality  of this informa-  
tion. However,  insecure  data storage,  poor encryption,  and incorrect  
data management  methods  can all lead to unwanted  access and data 
breaches  [9] . Internet  of Things (IoT) devices  frequently  rely on wire- 
less communication  protocols  such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth,  or cellular  net- 
works for network  security.  Attackers  may target these communication  
routes for eavesdropping,  interception,  or data modiﬁcation.  Insecure  
network  setups and insuﬃcient  encryption  can jeopardize  Internet  of 
Things (IoT) network  security  [35] . 
6.3. AI-driven  attack 
Cybersecurity  challenges  have been becoming  more complex  and 
challenging  due to the rapid growth  of technological  advancement  and 
increasing  digitalization  in diﬀerent  domains  making  cyber security  
more challenging.  One of the advancements  of technology  is artiﬁcial  
intelligence  (AI) and Machine  learning  and currently  emerging  trends of 
cyber-attack  is the use of AI and Machine  learning  technology.  Even if 
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  (AI) has a positive  impact on cyber security,  there is also a negative  impact which is artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) driven at- 
tacks. Attacks  that use AI technology  are two types: 1) Artiﬁcial  Intelli- 
gence (AI) assisted  attack which uses Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  (AI) and ma- 
chine learning  technologies  or techniques  to help human attackers  plan 
or execute  cyber-attacks  and 2) artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) autonomous  
attack use artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) and machine  learning  technology  
or Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  (AI) agents to carry out cyber-attacks  on vari- 
ous industries  autonomously  without  any human intervention.  Some of 
the threats performed  by AI-driven  attacks are: - 
Deep fake attacks [36] are done through  artiﬁcially  generated  false 
and convincing  media that uses AI and Machine  learning  technology  to 
generate  realistic  images,  video, audio, or text that can trick or imper- 
sonate humans  or systems  during social engineering  attacks.  Deep fakes 
can be used for a variety of malicious  goals, including  disseminating  
false information,  blackmailing,  faking biometric  authentication,  and 
so on. AI-generated  images,  video, audio, and texts can be purposively  
used to fool the AI and machine  learning  models or systems  used for 
cyber security  purposes,  to invade and mislead  security  systems  that 
depend  on AI and machine  learning  systems  like AI enable malware  de- 
tection,  spam ﬁltering,  facial recognition  and other biometric  security  
mechanisms  [37] . 
Botnet attacks [35] , botnets  are interconnected  devices  that are cen- 
trally controlled  by cyber criminals  to perform  diﬀerent  attacks on the 
targeted  area. Some of the attacks done by botnets  are distributed  de- 
nial of service attacks,  spamming,  stealing  data, and others. The botnet 
attack uses AI and machine  learning  technology  to patch security  vul- 
nerabilities  and increase  the speed of attack by automating  and scaling 
up the attacks to ﬁnd targets,  coordinate  attacks,  and evade detection  
[38] . 
Reinforcement  learning  enables  the agent to learn from its own ex- 
perience  and action and rewards  from the environment.  Hence, the RL 
machine  learning  technology  helps autonomous  artiﬁcial  intelligence-  
enabled  cyber-attacks  which adapts,  learns, and optimizes  the strategies  
based on their feedback  and response  from the targeted  system and au- 
tomates  the processes  of patching  and exploiting  the vulnerability  [13] . 
AI-driven  cyber-attacks  is a more complex  and sophisticated  attack 
which is challenging  to cyber security  and society.  Since the attacks 
hide and change their situation,  it is diﬃcult  to detect and attribute  the 
attacks.  AI-driven  attacks automate  the operation  of attacks that scale 
up at high speeds making  the attack unable to defend and damaging  the 
targeted  resources.  
6.4. Cloud computing  
Cloud security  adoption  and increasing  dependence  on cloud ser- 
vices introduce  new threats and vulnerabilities  for organizations.  Or- 
ganizations  that depend  on cloud services  experience  cyber security  
challenges  such as data breaches,  unauthorized  access, insecure  API, 
and shared infrastructures  which introduce  security  risks, data loss, and 
service disruption  which leads to unavailability  of critical services  and 
other security  threats and challenges  by faced the given organization  
[18] . 
7. Opportunities,  future research  directions  
Cybersecurity  is a dynamic  and evolving  ﬁeld that provides  aca- 
demics and innovators  with several opportunities  and diﬃculties.  Sev- 
eral potential  avenues  are being investigated  to address  the diﬃculties  
confronting  the cybersecurity  industries,  
Advanced  artiﬁcial  intelligence  and Machine  learning  techniques  to 
develop  defensive  technologies  against  cyber threats,  improve  cyber 
threat detection,  automate  cyber security  processes,  and prevent  cyber- 
attacks.  Since the cyber-attack  become  more complex  and sophisticated  
it needs to automate  the cyber defense  mechanism  by using Artiﬁcial  in- 
telligence  and machine  learning  technology  to enhance  cyber security.  
Real-time  AI enables  cyber threat detection  systems  to help the cyber 
5W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
Fig 1. Literature  search process and catego- 
rization of the studies. 
expert analyze  the vast amount  of data, detect cyber-attack  patterns,  
identify  threats and anomalies,  and automate  security  responses  to help 
cyber professionals  respond  to cyber-attacks  more eﬀectively.  In addi- 
tion to artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI) and machine  learning  (ML) technology,  
Biometric  Authentication  is the most eﬀective  technology  to secure the 
targeted  industries.  Biometric  authentication,  which validates  a user’s 
identiﬁcation  using unique biological  features  such as ﬁngerprints  or fa- 
cial recognition,  can improve  security.  Biometric  authentication,  when 
combined  with standard  authentication  techniques  such as passwords,  
makes it more diﬃcult  for thieves to get access to networks  and data. 
The development  of quantum  computers  was also one of the chal- 
lenges for the cyber security  of existing  cryptographic  systems  and to 
detect and respond  to any attacks related to the development  of quan- 
tum computer  technology,  there should be quantum-resistant  cryptog-  
raphy technology.  Future researchers  should focus on quantum-resistant  
algorithms  for cryptography  that can withstand  quantum  computer  at- 
tacks, ensuring  the long-term  security  of sensitive  cryptographic  data. 
The other critical concerns  of cyber security  challenges  are the lack of 
skilled professionals  and people have knowledge  gaps about cyber secu- rity and its risks. In the future the academician,  researcher  the govern-  
ment should focus on improving  human awareness  and education  about 
cyber security  (Human-centric  security).  Understanding  the role of hu- 
man behavior  in cyber security  should great future focus for academi-  
cians, researchers,  and governments.  Human-centric  security  includes  
promoting  cyber security  best practices  using advocacy,  developing  se- 
curity user interfaces  that are more interactive  with users like Chabot 
applications,  and research  on socio-technical  aspects  of cyber security.  
The automation  of security  processes  to automate  the response  to 
cyber threats is a very crucial point in the cyber industry.  The ability of 
Organizations  to respond  to attacks can be improved  by automating  se- 
curity processes  and orchestrating  security  tools. To automate  the secu- 
rity response,  there will be a focus on developing  intelligent  automation  
frameworks,  security  orchestration  platforms,  and incident  response  au- 
tomation  methodologies.  In addition  to automating  the cyber security  
process  and developing  security  monitoring  platforms,  there should be 
a threat intelligence  mechanism  and information  sharing  mechanism  to 
enhance  the collaboration  and information  sharing  between  organiza-  
tions, industries,  and governments  is a very critical thing to combat  and 
6W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
Table 1 
List of related works. 
Authors Paper Approaches  Finding Limitation  
[6] Blockchain-assisted  cyber 
security in medical things using 
artiﬁcial intelligence  Combination  of blockchain  and 
artiﬁcial intelligence  (AI). Blockchain  was found to be eﬀective in 
improving  the security of medical records and 
detecting  attacks on medical Internet of 
Things (IoT) devices. Data on the security of medical devices is 
lacking. This makes assessing  the eﬃcacy 
of blockchain-based  solutions  for 
enhancing  cyber security in medical 
devices challenging  
[24] A Novel System-Theoretic  
Matrix-Based  Approach  to 
Analyzing  Safety and Security of 
Cyber-Physical  Systems System-theoretic  matrix (STM The STM was useful for spotting possible risks 
and weaknesses  as well as for developing  
mitigation  plans. The approach  has only been used in one 
case study. For the process to be 
validated,  further case studies are 
required.  The methodology  does not 
address the issue of uncertainty  since the 
cyber-physical  system is more 
complicated,  making analysis 
unpredictable  and exposing it to risk. 
[25] An ensemble  deep learning model 
for cyber threat hunting in the 
industrial  Internet of things LSTM and AE neural networks.  The model was able to detect cyber threats 
with high accuracy.  The model has only been evaluated  on a 
dataset of Internet of Things (IoT) data 
from a single industrial  control system. 
The model does not address the issue of 
false positives.  
[26] Integration  of Healthcare  4.0 and 
blockchain  into secure 
cloud-based  electronic  health 
records systems Healthcare  4.0 and blockchain  
integration  with secure 
cloud-based  electronic  health 
record systems Develop mode secure and safe Model to 
Reduce the need for manual data entry and 
oﬀer a safe and eﬃcient means for authorized  
individuals  to access electronic  health records 
(EHRs) using Blockchain  technology.  Challenges  include the cost of using 
blockchain  technology,  the lack of 
experienced  employees  to implement  and 
operate blockchain  systems, and the lack 
of standards  for data exchange  and 
privacy-preserving  mechanisms  for data 
sharing. 
[27] Maximizing  the beneﬁts of 
sharing cyber threat intelligence  
by government  agencies and 
departments  Develop a theoretical  model that 
demonstrates  how the advantages  
of sharing cyber threat 
intelligence  are directly related to 
the diﬀerence  between the 
danger level indicated  by the 
cyber threat intelligence  and the 
sharing organization’s  prior 
assumption  about the threat 
level. The authors’ ﬁndings suggest that it is not 
optimal for government  agencies to focus on 
sharing CTI related to vulnerabilities  with the 
highest threat level. Instead, government  
agencies should focus on sharing CTI that is 
likely to have the greatest impact on 
organizations  with lower prior beliefs of the 
threat level. The authors’ ﬁndings are based on a 
theoretical  model and do not provide 
empirical  evidence to support their 
ﬁndings. 
[28] The Power of Beliefs in US Cyber 
Strategy: The Evolving Role of 
Deterrence,  Norms, and 
Escalation  A qualitative  examination  of the 
United States’ cyber 
security strategies  to track the 
evolution  of military cyber power 
theories in the United States. Identify signiﬁcant  themes and gaps in the 
United States cyber strategy. It depends on only US military cyber 
security departments.  
[3] Cyber threat Detection  Using 
Deep learning approaches  for the 
Internet of Things (IoT) The researcher  uses combined  
deep learning approaches  to 
detect the cyber security threat of 
malware attacks. Cyber threat classiﬁcation  model to classify 
malware attacks which helps to identify the 
pirated software used as a weapon for 
attacking  the Internet of Things (IoT) network Computationally  expensive  and needs a 
large dataset, and the researcher  does not 
consider the Adversarial  attacks that are 
purposively  done to mislead deep 
learning models. 
[39] Conducted  a comprehensive  
overview  of the use of machine 
learning (ML) in cybersecurity  Systematic  review on the role of 
machine learning in cyber 
security. The paper also discusses  the challenges  of 
using ML in cybersecurity,  such as the need for 
large amounts of labeled data, the diﬃculty  of 
interpreting  ML models, and the vulnerability  
of ML models to adversarial  attacks. The researcher  does not address anti- 
machine learning attacks and their 
challenges  
properly  respond  to cyber-attacks  on the targeted  cyber security  indus- 
tries. The researcher,  academician,  and cyber security  experts  should 
be focused  on developing  standard  frameworks  and platforms  to share 
cyber threats and bring up collaborative  cyber defense  mechanisms  for 
organizations,  industries,  and governments.  
Data protection  and privacy  is a great concern  in the digital world 
and the concern  of protecting  the data and privacy  is increasingly  grow- 
ing. Therefore,  privacy  regulations,  data protection  techniques,  and 
privacy-preserving  techniques  should be strengthened  and improved.  
Hence, the researcher  should have to focus on how to strengthen  the pri- 
vacy regulations,  and privacy  [reserving  techniques  using multi-party  
computation  and homomorphic  encryption  technology.  In addition  to 
this, the development  of blockchain  technology  is also one of the im- 
portant  concerns  to strengthen  the cyber security  of an organization.  
Blockchain  technology  and distributed  ladder system provide  a great 
solution  for security  and decentralized  systems  and diﬀerent  researcher  
has researched  implementing  blockchain  technology  in diﬀerent  cyber- 
security  areas such as Transaction  [7] , supply chain [15] , and in medical  
[ 6 , 26 ]. Even if blockchain  technology  has a great role in providing  secu- rity mechanisms  for the cyber security  domain,  there are diﬃculties  and 
challenges  such as immutable  or changeless  transactions,  the vulnera-  
bility of smart contact,  weakness  of protocols  used in blockchain  tech- 
nology like consensus  protocols  such as PoS and PoW for attacks,  depen- 
dency of external  system like oracle is also one of security  challenges  of 
Blockchain  technology.  In order to address  or minimize  such kind of se- 
curity problems  and challenges  in Blockchain  technology,  there should 
be taken and implement  appropriate  security  measurements  such as ap- 
plying safe smart contract  development  methods,  implementing  power- 
ful consensual  protocols,  incorporating  and integrate  privacy-enhancing  
strategies  as needed  are all part of this. To create a safe and robust sys- 
tem, it is critical to ﬁnd a balance  between  the beneﬁts  of blockchain  
and DLT and the related cybersecurity  issues ( Fig. 1 and Table 1 ). 
8. Conclusion  
Cyber security  is the process  of protecting  and safeguarding  com- 
puter systems,  networks,  and data from cyber threats that attach to the 
conﬁdentiality,  integrity,  and accessibility  of information  systems.  Cy- 
7W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
ber security  is essential  for protecting  the safety of individuals  and or- 
ganizations  since highly depend  on digital technologies.  Cyber security  
is applicable  in diﬀerent  application  areas such as health centers ﬁnan- 
cial institutions,  smart cities, grid systems,  government  organizations,  
education,  and the military.  Cyber securities  face diﬀerent  challenges  
from diﬀerent  sources  such as Hackers,  cybercriminals,  state actors, 
terrorists,  and insiders.  The challenges  faced by the cyber security  in- 
dustry are defensive  AI and Machine  learning  technology,  sophisticated  
cyber-attacks,  reinforcement  learning-based  cyber-attacks,  AI-enabled  
malware,  and the vulnerability  of IoT technology,  cloud security  issues, 
and the involvement  of cryptography.  However,  future directions,  in cy- 
bersecurity,  such as quantum  computing  (quantum-  secure encryption),  
biometric  authentication,  advanced  artiﬁcial  intelligence  (AI), and ma- 
chine learning  (ML), may be able to address  these issues. To ensure that 
our digital devices,  networks,  and data are secure against  cyber-attacks,  
individuals,  businesses,  and governments  must continue  to invest in cy- 
bersecurity.  
Funding  
No funding  received  for this paper. 
Author  contribution  
Wasyihun  Sema Admass,  and Yirga Yayeh created  the initial draft 
of the paper, Conceptualization,  supervision,  and methodology  based 
on extensive  discussions  on each point of Cyber security.  Both authors  
read and approved  the fnal manuscript,  Abebe Diro Provide  Sugustions,  
re-write  the drafts and palagarism  detections.  
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
We declare  that there are no competing  interests  that could compro-  
mise the objectivity  or impartiality  of the research.  We have no personal,  
professional,  or academic  relationships  that could be considered  as po- 
tential conﬂicts  of interest.  
Data availability  
There is no available  data. 
References  
[1] H. Kavak, J.J. Padilla, D. Vernon-Bido,  S.Y. Diallo, R. Gore, S. Shetty, Simulation  
for cybersecurity:  state of the art and future directions,  J. Cybersecur.  7 (1) (2021) 
1–13, doi: 10.1093/cybsec/tyab005  . 
[2] M.Z. Gunduz, R. Das, Cyber-security  on smart grid: threats and potential  solutions,  
Comput. Netw. 169 (2020) 107094, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2019.107094  . 
[3] F. Ullah, H. Naeem, S. Jabbar, S. Khalid, M.A. Latif, F. Al-Turjman,  L. Mostarda,  
Cyber security threats detection  in internet of things using deep learning approach,  
IEEE Access 7 (2019) 124379–124389,  doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2937347  . 
[4] J. Kaur, K.R. Ramkumar,  The recent trends in cyber security: a review, 
J. King Saud Univ.- Comput. Inform. Sci. 34 (8) (2022) 5766–5781,  
doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2021.01.018  . 
[5] M. Humayun,  M. Niazi, N. Jhanjhi, M. Alshayeb,  S. Mahmood,  Cyber security threats 
and vulnerabilities:  a systematic  mapping study, Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 45 (4) (2020) 
3171–3189,  doi: 10.1007/s13369-019-04319-2  . 
[6] M. Alshehri,  Blockchain-assisted  cyber security in medical things using artiﬁcial in- 
telligence,  Electron.  Res. Arch. 31 (2) (2023) 708–728,  doi: 10.3934/era.2023035  . 
[7] G.W. Peters, E. Panayi, Understanding  modern banking ledgers through blockchain  
technologies:  future of transaction  processing  and smart contracts  on the internet of 
money, SSRN Electron.  J. (2015) 1–33, doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2692487  . 
[8] A.M. Tonge, Cyber security: challenges  for society- literature  review, IOSR J. Com- 
put. Eng. 12 (2) (2013) 67–75, doi: 10.9790/0661-1226775  . 
[9] R. Sharma, Study of latest emerging  trends on cyber security and its challenges  to 
society, Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res. 3 (6) (2012) 1–4 . 
[10] A. Arabo, Cyber security challenges  within the connected  home ecosystem  futures, 
Procedia Comput. Sci. 61 (0) (2015) 227–232,  doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.201  . 
[11] J. Jang-Jaccard,  S. Nepal, A survey of emerging  threats in cybersecurity,  J. Comput. 
Syst. Sci. 80 (5) (2014) 973–993,  doi: 10.1016/j.jcss.2014.02.005  . 
[12] L.B. Naik, B. AsSadhan,  J.M.F. Moura, T. Saadawi,  A. El-Desouki,  A.S. Elmaghraby,  
M.M. Losavio, U. Sanath Rao, R. Swathi, V. Sanjana, L. Arpitha, K. Chan- 
drasekhar,  Chinmayi,  P.K. Naik, M. Alshehri,  N. Ben-asher,  C. Gonzalez,  M. Al- 
shehrima.alshehri@mu.edu.sa,  C. Hemminghaus,  . . . S. Ddos, Special Issue on Cyber 
Security and AI, J. Adv. Res. 41 (5) (2019) 557–559,  doi: 10.4218/etr2.12236  . [13] R. Maeda, M. Mimura, Automating  post-exploitation  with deep reinforcement  learn- 
ing, Comput. Secur. 100 (2021) 102108, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.102108  . 
[14] G.D. Rodosek,  M. Golling, Cyber security: challenges  and application  areas, Lect. 
Note. Logist. (2013) 179–197,  doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-32021-7_11  . 
[15] P. Dutta, T.M. Choi, S. Somani, R. Butala, Blockchain  technology  in supply chain op- 
erations: applications,  challenges  and research opportunities,  Transport.  Res. Part E: 
Logist. Transport.  Rev. 142 (May) (2020) 102067, doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2020.102067  . 
[16] K. Kimani, V. Oduol, K. Langat, Cyber security challenges  for IoT-based  
smart grid networks,  Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct.  Prot. 25 (2019) 36–49, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcip.2019.01.001  . 
[17] G. Sabaliauskaite,  J. Cui, L.S. Liew, Integrating  Autonomous  Vehicle Safety and 
Security Analysis Using STPA Method and the Six-Step Model Autonomous  Ve- 
hicle Security View Project Autonomous  Vehicle Security View Project Integrat- 
ing Autonomous  Vehicle Safety and Security Analysis Using STPA M, 11, 2018 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326504334  . 
[18] K. Thakur, M. Qiu, K. Gai, M.L. Ali, An investigation  on cyber security threats and 
security models, in: Proceedings  - 2nd IEEE International  Conference  on Cyber Secu- 
rity and Cloud Computing,  CSCloud 2015 - IEEE International  Symposium  of Smart 
Cloud, IEEE SSC 2015, 2016, pp. 307–311,  doi: 10.1109/CSCloud.2015.71  . 
[19] G. Srivastava,  R.H. Jhaveri, S. Bhattacharya,  S. Pandya, P.K.R. Rajeswari,  Mad- 
dikunta, G. Yenduri, J.G. Hall, M. Alazab, T.R Gadekallu,  in: XAI For Cybersecurity:  
State of the Art, Challenges,  Open Issues and Future Directions,  1, 2022, pp. 1–33. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.03585  . 
[20] Z. Zhang, H. Ning, F. Shi, F. Farha, Y. Xu, J. Xu, F. Zhang, K.K.R. Choo, Artiﬁcial in- 
telligence  in cyber security: research advances,  challenges,  and opportunities,  Artif. 
Intell. Rev. 55 (2) (2022) 1029–1053,  doi: 10.1007/s10462-021-09976-0  . 
[21] Y.-L. Cheng, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-L. Huang, C.A. Buckner, R.M. Lafrenie, J.A. Dénommée,  
J.M. Caswell, D.A. Want, G.G. Gan, Y.C. Leong, P.C. Bee, E. Chin, A.K.H. Teh, 
S. Picco, L. Villegas, F. Tonelli, M. Merlo, J. Rigau, D. Diaz, . . . R.H.J. Mathi- 
jssen, Smart health and cybersecurity  in the era of artiﬁcial intelligence,  in: In- 
tech, 11, 2016, p. 13. https://www.intechopen.com/books/advanced-biometric-  
technologies/liveness-detection-in-biometrics  . 
[22] N.N. Abbas, T. Ahmed, S.H.U. Shah, M. Omar, H.W. Park, Investigating  the applica- 
tions of artiﬁcial intelligence  in cyber security, Scientometrics  121 (2) (2019) 1189–
1211, doi: 10.1007/s11192-019-03222-9  . 
[23] H. HaddadPajouh,  A. Dehghantanha,  R. Khayami,  K.K.R. Choo, A deep Recurrent  
Neural Network based approach  for Internet of Things malware threat hunting, Futu. 
Gener. Comput. Syst. 85 (2018) 88–96, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2018.03.007  . 
[24] L.S. Liew, G. Sabaliauskaite,  N.K. Kandasamy,  C.Y.W. Wong, A novel system- 
theoretic  matrix-based  approach  to analysing  safety and security of cyber-physical  
systems, Telecom 2 (4) (2021) 536–553,  doi: 10.3390/telecom2040030  . 
[25] A. Yazdinejad,  M. Kazemi, R.M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha,  H. Karimipour,  An ensem- 
ble deep learning model for cyber threat hunting in industrial  internet of things, 
Digit. Commun.  Netw. 9 (1) (2022) 101–110,  doi: 10.1016/j.dcan.2022.09.008  . 
[26] H.B. Mahajan,  A.S. Rashid, A.A. Junnarkar,  N. Uke, S.D. Deshpande,  P.R. Futane, 
A. Alkhayyat,  B. Alhayani,  Integration  of healthcare  4.0 and blockchain  into se- 
cure cloud-based  electronic  health records systems, Appl. Nanosci. (Switzerl.)  13 
(3) (2023) 2329–2342,  doi: 10.1007/s13204-021-02164-0  . 
[27] J. Dykstra, L.A. Gordon, P. Martin, Maximizing  the beneﬁts from sharing cyber threat 
intelligence  by government  agencies and departments,  J. Cybersecur.  1 (2023) 1–12, 
doi: 10.1093/cybsec/tyad003  . 
[28] E.D. Lonergan,  The power of beliefs in US cyber strategy : the evolving role of de- 
terrence, norms, and escalation  and Jacquelyn  Schneider,  J. OfCybersecur.  (2023) 
1–10, doi: 10.1093/cybsec/tyad006  . 
[29] E.S. Barry, J. Merkebu,  L. Varpio, State-of-the-art  literature  review methodology:  
a six-step approach  for knowledge  synthesis,  Perspect.  Med. Educ. 11 (5) (2022) 
281–288,  doi: 10.1007/s40037-022-00725-9  . 
[30] C. Tankard,  Advanced  persistent  threats and how to monitor and deter them, Netw. 
Secur. 2011 (8) (2011) 16–19, doi: 10.1016/S1353-4858(11)70086-1  . 
[31] Prenosil, Advanced  persistent  threat attack detection  : an overview,  Int. J. 
Advancem.  Comput. Netw. Secur. –I J C N S 4 (4) (2014) 50–54 https://www.  
researchgate.net/publication/305956804  . 
[32] H.J. Hejase, H. Kazan, I. Moukadem,  Advanced  persistent  threats (APT): 
an awareness  review, J. Econ. Econ. Educ. Res. 21 (6) (2020) 1–8, 
doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.31300.65927  . 
[33] R. Kaur, M. Singh, A survey on zero-day polymorphic  worm detec- 
tion techniques,  IEEE Commun.  Surv. Tutor. 16 (3) (2014) 1520–1549,  
doi: 10.1109/SURV.2014.022714.00160  . 
[34] J. Clark, P.C. Van Oorschot,  SoK: SSL and HTTPS: revisiting  past challenges  and 
evaluating  certiﬁcate  trust model enhancements,  in: Proceedings  - IEEE Symposium  
on Security and Privacy, V , 2013, pp. 511–525,  doi: 10.1109/SP.2013.41  . 
[35] B. AsSadhan,  J.M.F. Moura, An eﬃcient method to detect periodic behavior in bot- 
net traﬃc by analyzing  control plane traﬃc, J. Adv. Res. 5 (4) (2014) 435–448,  
doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2013.11.005  . 
[36] B. Guembe, A. Azeta, S. Misra, V.C. Osamor, L. Fernandez-Sanz,  V. Pospelova,  The 
emerging  threat of ai-driven  cyber attacks: a review, Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence,  
36, Taylor & Francis, 2022, doi: 10.1080/08839514.2022.2037254  . 
[37] B. Bera, A.K. Das, M.S. Obaidat, P. Vijayakumar,  K.F. Hsiao, Y. Park, AI- 
enabled blockchain-based  access control for malicious  attacks detection  and 
mitigation  in IoE, IEEE Consum. Electron.  Maga. 10 (5) (2021) 82–92, 
doi: 10.1109/MCE.2020.3040541  . 
[38] V. Vouvoutsis,  F. Casino, C. Patsakis, On the eﬀectiveness  of binary emula- 
tion in malware classiﬁcation,  J. Inform. Secur. Applic. 68 (2022) 103258, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jisa.2022.103258  . 
[39] S.G. Langer, Cyber-security  issues in healthcare  information  technology,  J. Digit. 
Imaging 30 (1) (2017) 117–125,  doi: 10.1007/s10278-016-9913-x  . 
8W.S. Admass, Y.Y. Munaye and A.A. Diro Cyber Security and Applications 2 (2024) 100031
Wasyihun  Sema Admass(MSc):-  Received  a B.Sc. Degree in Information  Technology  
from Assosa University  in 2017, and the M.Sc.His-research  and teaching interests include 
the theory and application  of Machine Learning,  the internet of Things, Deep Learning,  
Computer  Vision, Wireless and Network security, and Natural Language  processing.  I am 
currently  serving as a lecturer at Assosa University  
Yirga Yayeh Munay(PhD):  - received a B.Sc. degree in Information  Technology  and an 
M.Sc. degree in Information  Science from Bahir Dar University  in Addis Ababa Univer- 
sity, Ethiopia in 2009 and 2014, respectively.  In 2021, he got his PhD Degree in Electrical  
Engineering  and Computer  Science (EECS) from the National University  of Technology  
(NTUT), Taiwan. From 2014 to 2017, he functioned  as a full-time lecturer and researcher  
on issues related to Information  Technology  in Assosa University,  Ethiopia.  In addition,  he acted as the head of the department  of Information  technology  from 2014 to 2016. 
From 2016 to 2017, he acted as the coordinator  of the Continuous  and Distance Educa- 
tion Program (CDEP) for the School of Informatics  in Assosa University,  Assosa, Ethiopia.  
Currently,  He is an assistant professor  at Injibara University,  Ethiopia,  as a researcher  
and Research  and Community  Service Vice Dean for Engineering  and Technology  Col- 
lege. His-research  interests are in the areas of application  of deep learning in wireless 
communication,  ad-hoc networks,  Resource  management,  UAV-base  station deployment,  
IoT, Emerging  Technologies.  
Abebe Diro(PhD,Asst.prof):-  He is a Lecturer in cybersecurity  at RMIT University.  He 
works closely with the Center for Cybersecurity  research and innovation.  He is interested  
in AI-based cyber security at continuum  of prevention,  detection,  and response.  
9