Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities
for Small and Medium Businesses
Photo: kras99/Adobe Stock
Transcript — March 9, 2021
 Available Downloads
Download Transcript 243kb
Clete Johnson: Good morning, everybody. We are very glad to have nearly 400 people
listening in now, and that number may grow while we’re – while we’re talking. My3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 1/29name’s Clete Johnson. I’m a partner at Wilkinson Barker Knauer, and also senior
fellow in the Strategic Technologies Program at CSIS.
I am very honored today to thank CSIS and Jim Lewis and the program for hosting
what we expect to be not only an exceptionally informative event, but one that is
incredibly timely with real-world operational response – operations underway right
now with various high-level compromises and attacks that our country is grappling
with. So we’ll let our esteemed colleagues get into that more.
But we have – we are going to talk about the challenges for – and opportunities for
critical infrastructure, small businesses. We’re lucky to have the information security
oﬃcer from one of those, Pioneer Telephone Cooperative, Chad Kliewer, on a – on a
panel a bit later, along with the chair of the Communications Sector Coordinating
Council, Robert Mayer, the newly installed executive assistant director of CISA Eric
Goldstein, and the associate bureau chief for public safety and homeland security at
the FCC Jeﬀ Goldthorp; along with the CEO from CyberRx, who put this survey
together, Ola Sage, who’s also played a major leadership role in the IT Sector
Coordinating Council.
But before we get to that excellent panel, I want to introduce and have a discussion
with truly one of the – I think it’s fair to say, one of the founding fathers of modern
cybersecurity law and policy, Congressman Jim Langevin, who is the ﬁrst and present
chair of the House Armed Services Committee’s new Subcommittee on Cyber,
Innovation, and Information Systems. And he’s also a commissioner on the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission, which has enacted a number of ideas into law in
the past year, and probably has more to do in 2021.
But before that, and on the point of Congressman Langevin’s being a founding father
of cyber policy, I want to go back to the 2008-2009 timeframe. I was a young staﬀer
on the Senate Intelligence Committee working closely with Congressman Langevin’s
then-staﬀer Jake Olcott, who was one of our early fellow travelers on the Hill in cyber
policy. And Congressman Langevin was the co-chair of – along with a Jim Lewis eﬀort
at CSIS – on a big report, a commission report for recommendations to the 44th
president. That president turned out – became President Obama.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 2/29And a lot of the recommendations in that commission report from early 2009 are now
policy. And they are the policy, and really the foundation of the policy environment
we’re navigating right now as we deal with SolarWinds, the other zero-day attack that
has been in the news in recent days. And so I just want to start by saying,
Congressman Langevin, we appreciate everything that you’ve done over the past
really decade or more to establish a policy environment that allows us to respond to
these challenges, and everything you’re doing now on the – on the House Armed
Services Committee, the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, and elsewhere.
So we’re honored to have you. Welcome. And I don’t know if you have anything to say
before we get into questions, but I’ve got a lot of – I’ve got a lot of things I’d love to run
through with you.
James Langevin: Sure. Well, ﬁrst of all, Clete, thanks for the introduction. It’s an honor
to be here with you today and to see some old friends, particularly Jim Lewis from
CSIS. And I want to thank CSIS for hosting this today, because, you know, under the
guidance of Jim Lewis CSIS and Jim Lewis have been integral to my cybersecurity
story, if you will. And that’s how I really got started in this – in this ﬁeld. Both – you
mentioned Jake Olcott.
Jake, my staﬀ director on the subcommittee that I chair that had jurisdiction over
cyber, so it originally at least – the working threats cybersecurity and science and
technology, and the emerging threats piece with all the bad stuﬀ – which is what I
thought we’d be preoccupied with – chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
threats. I ﬁgured those would be the things that kept me up at night that we’d be doing
the deep dive on, until Jake Olcott comes to me and tells me about this classiﬁed
brieﬁng I’m going to get on Idaho National Labs, and these two scientists who found
out – who discovered the Aurora threat, as we now know it, that could cause physical
damage through a cyberattack.
And so I began my deep dive on this. And then, of course, Jim Lewis asked Mike
McCaul and I – my ranking member – to co-chair the Cybersecurity for the 44th
Presidency – the CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency. And we
did this deep dive on cyber, on this topic. And it’s – and it’s really what launched me
into this direction. And it’s been a labor of love, although, you know, with great3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 3/29challenges along the way. But deeply indebted to Jim Lewis and CSIS for, you know,
setting me on this path and for all the great expertise that they have brought to the
table and brought to this issue of cybersecurity over the years. You’ll see many of the –
my subsequent work, whether it’s, you know, in the caucus or now the Solarium
Commission. You see a lot of the roots, the foundation of what we’ve done, coming
from that CSIS commission, that report on cybersecurity for the 44th presidency.
So thank you; probably too long in my opening there, but I just want to express my
gratitude and say a big hello to Jim Lewis.
Clete Johnson: Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman. And I think you just underscored
how long you’ve been working on this. And I think we’re at an inﬂection point now.
And we’re not coming to it ﬂatfooted. We’ve got a lot of work to do. But I think we
have the background of a decade or more of policymaking to address these
challenges.
So let me just start with the focus on small businesses. This – the small businesses, and
particularly critical-infrastructure small businesses, are at the heart of our economy
and our society. You’ve – over the years you have been dealing with very high-level
issues of Russia, China, Iran, North Korea, nation-state threats, the imperative of U.S.
technology leadership and core U.S. national-security interests.
So what does all – what do those big-picture issues mean for these small businesses
and the small-business critical infrastructure? Why does it matter to them? And why
does that matter to us?
James Langevin: Yeah. So, you know, good question. Thanks for framing it that way, if
you will.
You know, I think that it gets to the heart of something that I’m forever saying about
cybersecurity. It’s that it’s not a problem to be solved. There’s no such thing as perfect
cybersecurity. We need to frame it in that way right oﬀ the bat. No cybersecurity is
really – I’d say cybersecurity is really about risk management. If there’s one thing I
would want small-business owners to take away from my remarks today, it would be
that.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 4/29You know, you’re never going to install a device on your network one day or hire a
service provider and then be able to forget about cybersecurity for your business. You
look at cybersecurity, I’d say, as an ongoing process. So my advice to most small
businesses – think about what your digital assets are and what it is you’re really trying
to defend. You know, there’s some small businesses, for example, in my district that
do very sensitive work for the Navy, so helping us – they’re helping us build world-
class submarines. So for them, digital assets might be their sensitive intellectual
property. And for them, the threat from nation-states, particularly China or Russia,
might be quite substantial.
But for most businesses, the most valuable digital assets for them are likely to be
passwords to a bank account or customer information, and so – or, you know, maybe
they rely on their IT to keep everything running day to day. So it’s not risk to
conﬁdentiality that they’re the most concerned about, but threats to the integrity or
availability of the system. So for them it would be, you know, much more – they’d be
much more concerned about cybercriminals than getting on the radar of Russia or
Iran.
So cybercriminals, I’d say, are often in the volume business, looking into – where you
cover up a lot of less valuable data or lock up computers that they might charge a
couple of hundred dollars or a couple of thousand dollars to unlock. These criminals
go after entities really with the weakest cybersecurity hygiene, which often
unfortunately it means small businesses. And we’ve seen that too often. Ransomware
is rampant right now, and it’s hitting a lot of small businesses, in addition to hospitals
or school systems.
So I guess that might seem like a lot of talk in Washington, D.C. is divorced from the
reality of people back home. But I want to make something perfectly clear: Countries
like Russia actively aid and abet cybercriminals. And that is one of the real frustrating
things like that. And, you know, in other countries they’re just looking the other way.
You know, they don’t care if cybercriminals are operating in their borders. If it’s going
after something that’s targeted in the United States, what do they care? It’s
undermining our system, you know, our banking system or our business trust or
business ecosystem.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 5/29And we’re really living in a golden age of cybercrime because there are countries,
again, that allow and encourage criminals to operate within their borders, and it’s
frustrating beyond words. So while some of the talk of norms and the need for
stronger cyber diplomacy may seem esoteric, I can really assure you that it’s
increasingly relevant to stopping the constant stream of intrusions targeting small
businesses around the country.
Clete Johnson: Well, I think that’s the – all right. So that’s a great segue into the next
thing I wanted to explore with you, which is the concrete – this is not – you know,
secure connectivity, as evidenced by this – by this Zoom event, is a – is an imperative
part of our lives these days. Our kids are being educated online. We’re working – we’re
teleworking, getting health care in the middle of a pandemic through telehealth,
increasingly. And so this is a – this is a concrete reality for really all Americans. And a
lot of that connectivity is delivered by small businesses like Pioneer, who we’ll hear
from in a moment.
So given that the bad guys, be it either cybercriminals or adversary intelligence
services, are – we’re on the good-guy side, we all of us – the U.S. government and
industry – what can the government do, together with industry, to help? And you
know, on this – on the next panel we’ll have a number of key representatives – FCC,
DHS, IT sector coordinating council, communications sector coordinating council.
How do these entities – how can these entities support companies like Pioneer that are
trying to keep our society connected?
James Langevin: Yeah. So I would say, you know, one of the key concepts in
understanding Solarium policy recommendations is that of leverage. So the ability of
malicious cyber actors to scale their activities is one of the things that makes
cybersecurity problems so pernicious in a lot of ways.
On the Solarium Commission, therefore, we refocused on scalable solutions where a
focused application of resources could have a big impact. You know – you know, while
leverage is sprinkled throughout the report from the national cyber director to the
very idea of defending forward or defending early, as my fellow commissioner Chris
Inglis likes to say, really leaning into the point of high leverage, we acknowledge it
most explicitly in the idea of cybersecurity enablers. So we touched on these things.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 6/29So cybersecurity enablers are, in essence, a new class of critical infrastructure. And
since the Obama administration and Section 9 classiﬁcation of particularly important
critical infrastructure assets, you know, we’ve had the idea that not all critical
infrastructure entities can be lumped in together. And so Solarium expands on Section
9 with our concept of systemically important critical infrastructure, or we call is SICI
for short. I wish we had a better name, but that’s what – that’s what it stands for.
So SICI covers the assets that are most essential to supporting the national critical
function set. But you know – you know, rather than view critical infrastructure as
falling into two buckets – SICI and all the rest – Solarium realized that we needed a
third category of entity that, while perhaps not systemically important, were the, you
know, leverage points within the ecosystem. We need to treat these entities – the
internet service providers, managed security service providers, and cybersecurity
companies – diﬀerently, because when they take steps to protect their customers the
whole ecosystem really beneﬁts. And enhanced intelligence sharing with
cybersecurity enablers, for instance, is much more eﬃcient than trying to ensure that
every company has the latest CISA alert, for example, and it’s mostly the – results in
the same level of protection.
So I’d say that, you know, building out the operational collaboration between
government and cybersecurity enablers through programs like the joint collaborate
environment is a key recommendation of the – of the Solarium Commission.
Clete Johnson: That’s great. And with – thinking about managed services and – and
you know, it’s ironic that one of the – one of the best practices in cybersecurity,
particularly for small businesses, is to seek third-party managed services and to make
sure that their software is updated on a regular basis. And so this is something that’s
so troubling about the SolarWinds compromise, which is that companies that were
using SolarWinds to do – to help with their cybersecurity that was actually the vector
of the attack. So how do – what do we do – what do we do following SolarWinds to
make sure that companies like Pioneer can continue to get secure third-party services
and secure software updates?
James Langevin: Yeah. So, you know, this seems like a hard question but it’s actually
not. You know, we spend a lot of time telling people to update their software and then3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 7/29the threat actors abuse that mechanism to insert back doors, right. So I remind all
businesses that the SolarWinds campaign was extremely sophisticated, and this
actually goes back to the cybersecurity as a risk management exercise that I talked
about earlier. You know, it took a lot of Russians a lot of time to execute the
SolarWinds campaign.
So unless, you know, you’re a small business with a lot of sensitive intellectual
property or serve in the Department of Defense or intelligence community, my guess
is that you’re not on the Russians’ target list and, you know, that’s why my advice
remains the same. That’s to stay on top of your cyber hygiene. Many, many, many
more people get breached due to unpatched systems than due to, you know, bespoke
backdoors inserted into build processes. You know, now that software update has
been exploited as an avenue of attack, you know, a lot more attention, obviously, is
going to be paid to closing this particular door. It doesn’t guarantee that it can’t
happen again, but you’re far better oﬀ applying updates to remove zero-day exploits
than postponing them.
Clete Johnson: I think that’s – that is good advice. And with that, I want to close out by
transitioning to the report that the panel is going to discuss right after our discussion.
Of the critical infrastructure companies surveyed, 75 percent had experienced a
breach, including 45 percent in the last year.
On average, it took almost eight months to recover from these breaches and an
average of $170,000 to resolve the incident, which is, you know, big money for some
of the – from some of the small companies. Nearly 60 percent reported that the
incident stopped daily productivity and nearly half lost customers in the wake of the
incident.
So I guess what I want to ask you is, ﬁrst, do any of these numbers surprise you, and
second, what’s the value of a report and numbers like this for policymakers?
James Langevin: Yeah. So on the question of what’s – you know, if anything surprised
me, I’d say that, you know, 45 percent experiencing a breach in the last year seems
high. But I’m guessing that, you know, some of that is how we deﬁne breach. So, you
know, we’re having these conversations today as we try to work out the speciﬁcs of3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 8/29when something crossed the line to an incident, you know, versus someone snooping
around or doing port scanning.
So I guess I’m a bit disturbed that only 13 percent say they’d use government
guidance. But I also wonder if that’s the case, it’s a case of this being the victim of its
own success, perhaps. You know, after all, most of the cryptographic algorithms that
we use are government standards. But I don’t think a lot of people think of SHA-256 as
being a government product. You know, we use it every day. So that’s – I guess that’s
what, you know, kind of the things that stood out to me that maybe surprised me, if
you will, or that really caught my attention.
You know, on the other question, you know, you had about the value of the survey for
policymakers, you know, I think it’s – I think it’s an important reminder how pervasive
these problems are and, you know, one of my colleagues on the Solarium
Commission, Dr. Samantha Ravich, has been making the point that we too often fail to
account for the human toll of cyber incidents, and whether that’s the consumer
victims of cybercrimes or the small businesses, you know, I agree with her that the
conversations we have in D.C. can stray from the actual human cost of these breaches.
And so surveys like this can help us better understand the full range of the ways that
our constituents experience cybersecurity. And I think that they help us persuade our
colleagues to prioritize cybersecurity on a national agenda.
I think, you know, the bottom line is that as much as, you know, we’ve been trying to,
you know, up the awareness of cybersecurity over the years, the things that have
gotten everyone’s attention the most and have really hit home as a problem are the –
are the – you know, the compromises that – you know, the targets of the world that
compromise personal private information of customers that then, you know, people
are up in arms. They, you know, get – they get back to their members of Congress and
saying: What are you doing about this? Congress gets worked up. And then you have
surveys like, you know, you put out that really helps us to understand the full scope of
this and makes it real. So really invaluable work, and I’m deeply appreciative.
Clete Johnson: Well, thank you, Congressman. And thank you for your time. And
again, not just your time this morning but over a decade of leadership on these issues.
As I said in the beginning, I think we’re – it appears to me that we’re in an inﬂection3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 9/29point in both the operational and the geostrategic and policymaking environment on
these issues. And I think it’s – I think there’s value in surveys like this, and also at the –
you know, at the leadership and activities that you have underway on the committee
and at the Solarium Commission, and beyond. So we thank you for your time and look
forward to working with you in the coming months and years.
James Langevin: Thank you, Clete. You too. I appreciate you moderating, hosting me
here today. And shoutout to, again, you, to CSIS, and especially to Jim Lewis. Thank
you. Take care.
Clete Johnson: Absolutely. Thank you, sir. Thank you very much.
Well, I just want to thank the congressman for joining us here. And with that I want to
turn the event over to another great leader in cybersecurity policy, this time working
from the private sector. I’ve had the honor of working with Robert Mayer in his role at
USTelecom and also in his role leading the Communications Sector Coordinating
Council, for about as long as I’ve been watching the leadership of Congressman
Langevin.
And I will say that – whether it’s working on the FCC’s advisory committee, the CSRIC
– I won’t even go through that acronym – but the leadership that Robert has shown in
that capacity, on the supply chain task force, and in a whole host of issues ﬁghting
botnets and establishing the Council to Secure the Digital Economy. Robert is also one
of the most inﬂuential leaders in this arena.
And I will give him the honor of introducing his esteemed panel. It is another great
group of leaders. And, like I said, I think sort of a microcosm of the solution set – FCC,
DHS, IT Sector Coordinating Council, Communications Sector Coordinating Council,
and then in the form of Pioneer Chad Kliewer, one of the small businesses that’s
keeping our society connected.
Robert, over to you.
Robert Mayer: Oh, great. Thank you, Clete, for those kind remarks. And thank you to
CSIS and Jim Lewis for hosting this event and giving USTelecom an opportunity to talk
to such distinguished panelists as we have here about the critical infrastructure small3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 10/29and medium business survey that we conducted. I’m just going to do a quick
introduction because all of these folks really deserve the same kind of laudatory
remarks you made for me. They’re all leaders, and it’s been a real honor to work with
each one of them over the years.
Ola Sage describes herself as an entrepreneur at heart. She’s a recognized leader in
cybersecurity, a CEO of CyberRx. She leads an organization with a particular focus on
cybersecurity for small and medium businesses. Ola and CyberRx led the research
eﬀorts associated with the USTelecom SMB survey that we discussed today.
Chad Kliewer is the information security oﬃcer overseeing the cybersecurity, privacy,
and IT governance programs for Pioneer Telephone Cooperative based in Kingﬁsher,
Oklahoma, and a member of USTelecom. He has over 20 years’ experience in
information technology with responsibilities ranging from PC tech to chief
information oﬃcer, and most of that time being the primary person responsible for
security.
Jeﬀ Goldthorp is the associate bureau chief at the Federal Communications
Commission. His role in the public safety and homeland security is chief data oﬃcer
and national security policy. Jeﬀ has been involved in numerous cybersecurity
initiatives with industry through his prior leadership on the FCC’s Communications
Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council, CSRIC.
Eric Goldstein serves as the executive assistant director for the DHS Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA. In this current and recently appointed role, he
leads CISA’s mission to protect and strengthen federal civilian agencies and the
nation’s critical infrastructure against cyber threats. Eric returned to DHS with the
new administration, and our sector is looking forward to advancing the partnership
we have with DHS as our sector-speciﬁc agency.
We’re pleased to have all these panelists today.
Now to the report. Real quickly, USTelecom commissioned the report last year,
conducting the survey several months after the pandemic changed all of our lives.
CyberRx interviewed 14 CEOs and senior-level executives for a qualitative3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 11/29understanding of their perspectives around SMB Cyber and their organizations in
particular. This was followed up by a detailed survey with 323 responses across
multiple critical infrastructure sectors including, for example, ﬁnancial services,
health care, critical manufacturing, information technology, and communications.
OK. Before we get into some of the speciﬁcs, I want to ask you folks the same question
that Clete asked the congressman. You’ve had a chance to look at the report and read
it, and I’m wondering if you can share with us what you found as the most surprising
results of the – of the survey, perhaps what you would not have expected, either a
particular ﬁnding or more generally across the ﬁndings of the report. And let’s start
with – maybe I’ll ask Ola to begin.
Ola Sage: Good morning. Thanks, Robert. And I just also want to add my thanks to
CSIS for hosting this event and to USTelecom. We were really grateful and appreciated
the opportunity to be a survey partner on this really groundbreaking study that was
primarily focused on just critical-infrastructure SMBs.
There were so many things that were of note in this survey, so it’s hard to pick one.
But I think the one that I would probably start with was just what kept coming
through was this relationship between the size of an organization and their
experiences with cybersecurity. So whether it was the amount of time it took to
recover or how much money they spent or their exposure to attacks, that was
something that really stuck out to us and something that I think we would love to
learn more about because that could also inﬂuence various kinds of policies and
guidance that we use going forward.
Robert Mayer: OK. Thank you.
Chad?
Chad Kliewer: Thanks, Robert.
And I have to say that part of the report that really surprised me in there and still
perplexes me just a little bit is the part where it talks about which – how comfortable
you are with your information security, how secure your company is. Starting with the
smallest companies, they’re pretty sure of themselves. In the middle, not so much.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 12/29And then once it got to the larger companies, they’re more sure of themselves again.
And I thought that was really telling, and it makes me wonder: The smallest
companies, do they really not know what the threats are out there, or are they really
that conﬁdent that they’re secure? So I thought those were some really interesting
numbers that came out of this.
Robert Mayer: OK.
Eric?
Eric Goldstein: Thanks, Robert. And just echoing the other panelists, thanks to CSIS.
And of great importance, thanks to Mr. Langevin for his decades of leadership in this
space and for the Solarium Commission’s work in really advancing the state of the
cybersecurity discourse in this country. Certainly, we at CISA are deeply grateful for
the congressman’s work and that of the commission.
You know, I really share Chad’s observation on the report, which is I remarked upon
the surprisingly high number of companies across all tranches of the study reporting
very high conﬁdence in their cybersecurity protections. And I think this is a time,
particularly given the ongoing intrusion campaigns that we’re seeing in this country,
when all companies and all organizations need to be taking a deeply self-reﬂective
look at their cybersecurity controls.
I will just call out of particular importance the ongoing vulnerabilities and intrusion
campaign targeting Microsoft Exchange servers, which aﬀect companies and
organizations big and small throughout our country. I would just take this opportunity
to encourage any attendees at this panel, please do urgently look at guidance that my
agency, CISA, has put out to mitigate this vulnerability. It is an urgent national risk and
I think reﬂects the fact that, big or small, all organizations face signiﬁcant
cybersecurity risks and need to prioritize controlling those risks accordingly, whether
doing it in house or with a third party. We are past the days when SMBs or large
companies can not be in the business of cybersecurity. Every business leader needs to
see cybersecurity risk as a core function of their business risk management.
Robert Mayer: OK, very good. Thank you.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 13/29And Jeﬀ.
Jeﬀ, you are on mute.
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: Thanks, Robert. I was having some diﬃculty getting unmuted.
(Laughs.) Thank you.
And thank you to USTelecom and to CSIS for having us on the panel today. It’s a
pleasure to be here.
And let me oﬀer some thoughts about the question that you asked. First of all, the
report that you all issued, I thought, was very good. And there were some really good
insights there. One thing – I will share something that the congressman observed is the
relatively low percentage of respondents that were using guidance from various
federal agencies in their cyber-response eﬀorts.
And I think the words he used were that maybe we’re a victim of success there in
some ways. I think there are some things we can do to improve there. And we can
probably talk about those some more later. We’ve got some – I’ve got some ideas I can
share with you. There’s some work going on in the task force that you’re co-chairing,
Robert, that might be helpful there, and some work that’s been done over the years in
CSRIC that you were involved in that could contribute.
Something else – and this is a little – this was surprising to me – was what appeared to
me to be the relatively low incidence and low cost of cyber events aﬀecting
respondents. And now I think that there could be interesting discussion about this,
because I think, depending on your point of view, you might say, well, if you’re a small
and medium-size business, you don’t have a whole lot of money to spend. So, you
know – but still, when you take the numbers from the survey and you run through the
expected value, you come up with a ﬁgure that isn’t super high. And that surprised
me.
So that I just wanted to throw out as something that has sort of caught my eye.
Robert Mayer: Yeah.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 14/29Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: And I’ll turn it back over to you.
Robert Mayer: Sorry to interrupt. Jeﬀ, I think you make a great point about the costs
and the beneﬁts, you know. As indicated by Clete earlier, average – companies spent
on average $170,000 to recover from a breach. Forty-six percent claimed that they had
lost customers as a result. Fifty-nine percent reported that they had the incident that
stopped daily productivity. And it took as much as seven and a half months to fully
restore.
So there is a big cost. And then you have to match that – and again, that’s an average
number, so it varies by size. But you’d have to kind of take that as the cost and then
think about what it would cost perhaps to mitigate that. And I think you probably will
ﬁnd some cost-eﬀective price point in which to invest in cybersecurity.
The report states that, quote – and I’m quoting here – critical-infrastructure SMBs with
$50 million-plus in revenue indicated that they use and place a great deal of
importance on nearly all best practices assessed in the survey. Conversely,
organizations with less than $1 million revenue are more likely to report placing a
lower level of importance for a majority of the best practices than SMBs with more
than $1 million. Respondents were asked about their use of speciﬁc best practices,
such as multifactor authentication, training, policies and procedures, risk
assessments, insurance, and software updates.
I’d be interested in knowing your thoughts on the implications of this ﬁnding, and
more speciﬁcally what you think are the biggest obstacles to raising the cybersecurity
posture across many critical-infrastructure SMBs. So who wants to volunteer and take
that ﬁrst? Otherwise I’ll –
Ola Sage: I’ll take a –
Robert Mayer: Thank you, Ola
Ola Sage: I’ll take a stab at it.
And, you know, this is something that was of interest. Our lead researcher, Dr.
Williams, was really – this was something that struck his attention as well. And, you3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 15/29know, the explanations could range anywhere from, you know, perhaps these SMBs
have this sense of invincibility in that they feel like perhaps they’re less of a target
because their revenue is not high, and so maybe they don’t feel that there’s as much of
a priority in terms of investing in some of these interventions. But that’s something
that we want to understand more.
I also quickly just wanted to add some context to that 13 percent, because I think that
the way it was asked was how are they using it to make decisions, right. So it wasn’t
really reﬂecting that they didn’t read the guidance or value the guidance. It was how
are they using it to make decisions. So we were actually a little pleasantly surprised to
see that over 10 percent were actually using, you know, federal or government
information to make decisions. And certainly we want to see that number increase,
but as a starting point it was something that was, we thought, a positive, net positive.
Eric Goldstein: Hi, Robert. I’ll also oﬀer a view here, if I may, just on the broader
question, which is how do we further incentivize or encourage investment among
SMBs in this critical area?
And I think one important framing point is that, you know, adversaries of all types are
targeting American businesses now. And it is not just the case that if you are a
company that has highly sensitive IP or provides critical infrastructure that you’re the
only type of company at risk. We are now seeing adversaries, including criminal
groups, that will launch what I call indiscriminate attacks, really just targeting
anybody in this country with a vulnerability in order to launch ransomware attacks,
extort money for information, those kind of activities.
And so really every company in America is at risk. And, you know, even if the services
provided or the data stored by a given company wouldn’t seem to be of interest to
adversaries, that’s simply not the threat activity that we are seeing across this country.
And so every executive should see themselves as being at risk and take urgent steps to
manage vulnerabilities in their IT infrastructure, whether they’re providing it
themselves or contracting with a third party for those same services.
Robert Mayer: And Eric, we’re going to get to that point about executives next, but
thank you for that.3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 16/29Jeﬀ, do you have some thoughts on the results and what the –
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: Yes.
Robert Mayer: – implications are?
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: Yes, I do. Thank you, Robert.
I think the – one thing I would suggest, one of the – you were asking what can be done
to help better prepare. And I think that if I were a small and medium-size company
and looking at the volume of guidance and practices – and I’m thinking now
speciﬁcally about the commission, right, and you’re familiar with the work that CSRIC
has done. There are 400 cybersecurity-related best practices that CSRIC has
recommended to the commission and that we’ve made publicly available. That’s a lot.
If you’re a tier-one communications provider, that may be something that you can
absorb and you have the staﬀ to apply and you’ve got the resources to apply. If you’re
a small communications provider taking that number of practices and ﬁguring out
which ones are the most important and which ones to spend money on is challenging.
And even ﬁnding somebody to go through 400 things – (laughs) – and making that
decision can be challenging.
So what occurred to me is that – and I think this is something that you and task forces
are thinking about as well – is what can be done to take the guidance in various forms
from CISA and from FCC, from NIST, and boil it down into something that is more that
can be applied in a more practical way by smaller companies, not just
communications providers. But that to me would be a useful outcome.
Robert Mayer: And you have one of the co-chairs of a new task-force group on small-
medium business. So Ola –
Ola Sage: Yes. Yes, absolutely. And just to build on that point, I think this boils down to
– you know, our friend Larry Clinton, right – the economics of this, right, for most
small and mid-sized businesses, how can we make it economically viable for
companies of all sizes to invest? And how can we move this up on the prioritization3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 17/29list, right, so that it becomes a higher priority, and it’s – and it’s more economically
feasible?
Robert Mayer: Yeah. A great segue to you, Chad, since you have to live with the
economics of security every single day. How do you prioritize? How do you think
about making the case to your management about resources and determining what’s
most critical and what assets are most essential? What’s the – what’s the process like?
You can talk an hour for that. You’ve got a minute or two.
Chad Kliewer: Yeah, you’re exactly right. It could easily take an hour. But, you know,
number one, the ﬁrst thing I try to do is – even though I’m a technologist at heart, I
have to try to take the technology out of things. We have to think like the business and
really elevate information security and cybersecurity to the business level. It’s not a
technical problem. It is a business issue. And the ﬁrst thing that we have to do there –
you know, of course, we can’t implement all 400 and some of those
recommendations. There’s just no way you can do that in a small or even a medium
business. Even a large business would probably have challenges with that.
So what we’ve got to do is ﬁgure out – you know, the ﬁrst conversations I had here at
Pioneer is where are the crown jewels. What are we trying to protect? What – you
know, where are our vulnerabilities? What’s our biggest step? And you know what we
found here? Our biggest – our biggest assets are, number one, the network availability.
That’s number one for us. And then, of course, number two is our reputation or our
integrity. So those are where we have to concentrate our eﬀorts. So we have to make
sure that everything we do as part of an information security program is trying to
align with those business goals and make sure that we’re, number one, protecting the
availability of our networks and, number two, protecting the integrity of those
networks and the accounts that are around it.
Now, that’s not to say that we completely ignore the other parts of it, because
conﬁdentiality of course is a very important part. But the conﬁdentiality part does not
play quite as big a role if we can’t provide a network.
Robert Mayer: Yeah. Yeah, to your point about business, I think that’s what motivated
USTelecom to set up a partnership with the American Small Business Development3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 18/29Centers. They have 4,000 centers that are now working on developing a cybersecurity
program. But, to your point, in the language of their businesspeople, not so much in
terms of operations and technology, so they get more comfortable with it.
I’m going to – I’m going to move along. I want to point to one of the ﬁndings in the
report that I think may be a little bit concerning. That is the discrepancy between the
board and C-suite views on cybersecurity as a high priority, versus the lower echelons,
the employees of an organization. I think the distinction was 50 percent view it very
high at the – at the very top management level, versus 26 percent at the employee
level. And I want to know what you think – what do you attribute that kind of
disconnect? And most importantly, what needs to happen internally within the
enterprise and externally among stakeholders to narrow that gap? Who would like to
take that?
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: Robert, I’m happy to –
Robert Mayer: Yeah, go ahead, Jeﬀ.
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: One thing that I noticed in the report is that only 40 – well, I say
only – but 42 of the smallest respondents made use of sort of educational, you know,
supplements after an exploit. And that’s the sort of thing that would seem to come at a
relatively low cost. And so, you know, if you’re going to do something, that’s
something you can do. And it’s, say, on the low end of the – of the pain curve. So that
surprised me. And it also would, I would think, lead to a – it would – if there were
more education, more awareness, more training being done – especially after an
incident like that – then you might have seen a diﬀerent outcome in the survey.
Robert Mayer: OK. Very good. Anyone else want to comment?
Chad Kliewer: Yeah, Robert, I’ll jump in on that one just a little bit. You know, I think
it’s education – it’s all about education. And it’s all about empowering the workforce. I
was – I was not that surprised to see 50 percent of executives count it as a high
priority. It’s – let’s be honest, it’s not a money maker for most people. You know, we’re
a place where you throw money and watch it go down the drain, although we’re doing3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 19/29good work for it. Don’t get me wrong there. But you know, it’s not a money maker for
companies. And that’s why it harder for companies to see.
The other side of that is the employee part. And that part, you know, I have to say,
that part hurt me. I spend a lot of time – I spend most of my time concentrating on the
employees and on the workforce in making sure that everybody in the workforce
knows that they are a part of the cybersecurity team here at Pioneer. And that’s what
it’s got to be. I hear too many times, oh, the antivirus protection will – you know, the
antivirus will protect me from that, or so-and-so will protect me from that, or the stuﬀ
you do, you know, you’ll protect us.
And the fact of the matter is, no, I can’t protect everything. And that’s why I have to
make sure that everybody knows that they are a part of the solution. And it’s more –
we talk about partnerships. We talk about partnerships at the industry and
government level. I build those same types of partnerships right here in between
departments, in between individual people to make sure everybody knows we’re all
partners, we’re all in this together, and there’s not one of us going to protect it.
Robert Mayer: Mmm hmm. Ola, can I ask you maybe to comment? I know you work
with companies at the executive level, so you have a good appreciation, I think, for
what their awareness, heightened awareness or lack thereof, is, versus employees.
What can you – what do you see broadly across the SMB spectrum?
Ola Sage: Sure. So here I kind of wear two hats. One is, you know, CEO myself of a
small, mid-sized business, and what I’ve seen over the years in my own companies.
And then as a practitioner, right? And I do think that the gap was striking. So from the
CEO hat perspective, I would say, you know, every company values – you know, what
the top of an organization values is what the company ultimately will value. And
perhaps even more – you know, more signiﬁcantly in smaller organizations, where
you don’t have thousands of employees, et cetera.
So there are a couple of explanations, but I think this is deﬁnitely something that we
would love to explore more. It could be anything from the executives just have more
access to this information and so they’re more aware and informed about cyber
threat, and therefore they value it more. And it could also be that even though they3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 20/29value it more, there are not internal mechanisms within their companies to get that
information to the employees, right? So whether – they may not have programs in
place, or they may not have opportunities or mechanisms for the employees to get
access to the same information they have.
On the employee side, it could be as simple as they just feel like it’s somebody else’s
job, right? It’s the job of IT. It’s the job of the company. It’s not their personal
responsibility, which still brings us back to this education and awareness question. So
it was striking. And I think there are opportunities there to understand better what
that’s about, so that we can ﬁgure out how to close that gap.
Robert Mayer: Mmm hmm. Eric, I know you’re – you’ve got some time constraints. Are
you still there, Eric, or did we lose you already? We may have – Eric is doing the lord’s
work at DHS right now, so understood.
Let me – let me start probing on a couple of things that I think go to managing
expectations, frankly, of companies in the small and medium business size. And I
think this is particularly relevant in thinking through current policy and also future
policy. And I’m glad Ola that you mentioned our friend Larry Clinton because over the
years I’ve become a disciple on many of his points, and especially the notion that this
is an economic problem at its heart.
So given that many of the most recent attacks, the highly visible ones, you know, are
conducted by criminals – you know, organized criminals, many of whom are in
partnership with certain governments, nation-state adversaries. And there are two in
particular that are capturing headlines right now. I think it’s important to think about
what is the government’s role in protecting SMBs, and more broadly industry, from
those kinds of attacks? And what is the industry role? And how do you – how do you
parse that? How do – how do you work through those – that balancing act?
Who would like to start with taking that? Jeﬀ, I can ask you to think about that, maybe
to start with us, because, obviously, in the government you have to think about
making sure there’s accountability and that there is progress in this area. But you
know, as Larry said, you know, the varsity team missed SolarWinds. And it was sitting
there, I don’t know, for eight months or longer without it being detected, and it was3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 21/29the private sector that detected it. How do you think about a small and medium
critical-infrastructure company – a water company in some city in Ohio, very limited
resources, you know, looking at its rates, looking at its customer base and their ability
to pay – how are they supposed to defend themselves against those kinds of attacks?
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: OK. Thanks, Robert. Let me – you said you’d give me some time to
think about this, so I’ll take give seconds. (Laughs.)
Robert Mayer: Absolutely. Take longer.
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: (Laughs.) OK. But I will take a moment because that’s a serious
question. Not that you – you know, all the questions you’ve asked are serious. That’s a
hard question.
So one of the things that the congressman mentioned was using, you know, essentially
cybersecurity insurance and third parties, OK, so using other stakeholders that are
participating or contributing to provide solutions, right? If you are a small- and
medium-sized business, that is something to consider because you probably won’t
necessarily have the means to do it all yourself. So relying or ﬁnding the right partners
that can help you compete eﬀectively is one way to do it. And those two – those two
segments or those two categories of players are two that I would consider.
You started your question by asking about the role of government, right? Am I right? Is
that –
Robert Mayer: Yes. Yes.
Jeﬀrey Goldthorp: OK. And so I think that diﬀerent agencies will answer that question
diﬀerently. CISA will, obviously, have an answer. They’re the sector-speciﬁc agency for
communications, as well as other critical sectors. And NIST has a – has a major role to
play in establishing standards and guidance in this area. FCC, the regulator, has a role
to play.
And the good news is that, as you know, I think – and hopefully you’ll back me up –
there’s been a really outstanding teaming relationship between those three agencies
over the years in this space. And that applies to the work in CSRIC IV that you were3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 22/29involved in, Robert, and it applies to other elements of work. So the fact that there’s
good teaming between the agencies that have a direct role to play is helpful.
I think that what would be even more helpful and something we can work on going
forward – and maybe with the beneﬁt of the work that the taskforce is about to start –
is to – is to try and apply what can be a fairly robust and rich and large – (laughs) – set
of guidance and practices to a – to a sector or a segment that has a diﬀerent set of
needs and where the scale is smaller. So, now, that is – there has been an eﬀort.
There’s been some work like that done in the past that Working Group 4 was involved
in back in the day. This has been several years now. But I think the work that the
taskforce will be doing will be really helpful in bringing together the FCC and the
other agencies that have a role to play in this in trying to build solutions that are – that
take what the government is having – has to oﬀer for what are the larger entities and
make them more useful to the types of ﬁrms that we’re trying to reach on this – in this
venue.
Does that answer your question, or have I –
Robert Mayer: I actually found your response exceptionally thoughtful, and I think the
points you raise are important and need to be followed up on.
For the beneﬁt of the audience who may not know, the references to the taskforce
refer to the Department of Homeland Security ICT – Information and Communications
Technology – Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force. That’s a long title. We never
ﬁgured out a way to make that a little smaller. We are now starting a third program
after two years of reports. And one of the points that we’re interested in doing that we
will do is taking the products that have been developed over two years on supply
chain and making sure they’re not sitting on a shelf and nothing happens with them.
So the work – the taskforce is actually working now to make sure that the best
practices and the insights that came out of all of that analysis get – become available
and get adopted and understood by members in this ICT sector and in particular,
importantly, for SMBs.
Does anybody else want to respond to the question I posed to Jeﬀ regarding the
distinction between dealing with attacks that are, you know, global and highly3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 23/29sophisticated to the point where even the best organizations on the planet are
struggling to keep up with them, and how small businesses have to position
themselves in this kind of environment going forward?
Chad Kliewer: I can take that, Robert.
I think the important thing to remember – and you know, part of me says – as much as
it pains me to say, you know, part of me says it’s really great that we’re seeing this kind
of press on some of these huge – on some of these huge breaches that are out there.
You know, it does bring cybersecurity more into light. It deﬁnitely brings it to top of
mind for a lot of folks.
The thing to remember, and especially about the SolarWinds breach, there was some
very, very sophisticated stuﬀ going into that in establishing that backdoor that was
done by, you know, a nation-state. The thing is, though, is once they established that
backdoor and once they got their foothold in an organization, they weren’t necessarily
quiet moving around, doing what they were doing. So those that started from the
basics and really started building their security programs using those very basics – the
two-factor authentication, making sure your employees have training, making sure
your software’s up to date – that stuﬀ really played a huge role after that foothold was
gained and stopped them from going a whole lot further in many – in many
organizations. You know, they still were able to get too far in a lot of – in a lot of, I
guess, high-value organizations, but some very basic cybersecurity hygiene stopped
them from a lot of organizations.
Robert Mayer: Mmm hmm.
Ola?
Ola Sage: Robert? Sure.
I was just going to add a thought. I think, based on kind of what I’ve been seeing and
experiencing, I couldn’t agree more that we’re going to need both sides, right,
government and industry. And these partnerships, whether it’s the ICT Supply Chain
Task Force or other public-private partnerships, I really think are going to be a huge
part of the – you know, the solution going forward in terms of how to deal with these3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 24/29things. And I think that in some areas the government will lead and then in others the
private sector should lead or will need to lead.
The National Infrastructure Advisory Council just published a report about actionable
cyber intelligence, right, and it’s an executive-led collaboration model about how to
potentially establish what – this was called a critical infrastructure command center.
And the goal of this particular solution is essentially to create solutions products that
can be deployed quickly to large and small companies to help them understand in a
much faster way kind of how their systems or infrastructure may be exposed. So it’s
things like that that I think that, you know, government and industry working together
to actually come up with actual actionable solutions will really make the diﬀerence.
Robert Mayer: OK.
Looking at the time, so I’ve got one more question, and want to – it’s kind of self-
serving. But if we were going to do a survey again, what would you like to see us
explore based on what we learned from this ﬁrst eﬀort? Where can we improve the
information?
So, Ola, I’ll start with you. Maybe you have some thoughts on this. I’m sure you do.
You know, where can we probe to get some even more important and actionable
insights?
Ola Sage: Well, I’ll start with something the congressman talked about when he
mentioned some of the things that caught his attention, and particularly the 45
percent who experienced a breach in the last year. And I think one of the things that
was interesting to us was, you know, it’s been clear about the distinction between
attack and breach, but how diﬀerent companies interpret what is a breach. Is it just
disruption? Is it damage? Is it theft? Is it unauthorized access?
I think those are areas that we want to potentially explore a little further. So we’re all
talking about the same thing when we say breach, because that was a fairly high
number as well. And I think, going back to my original comment about this
relationship between size of organization and their experiences with breach, I mean,
we found that, you know, 11 million (dollars) to – I think there was 20 million (dollars)3/5/25, 10:37 AM Cybersecurity Challenges and Opportunities for Small and Medium Businesses
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-challenges-and-opportunities-small-and-medium-businesses 25/29