54   FALL 2018   VOL. 43, NO. 3  www.usenix.org
COLUMNSIt will come as no surprise that 50, or even 20, years ago inquisitive 
minds were often at a loss for bodies of numbers upon which they could 
rely. Putting aside the precise meaning of “rely” for the moment, a short -
age of numbers is less and less a reason for inaction in any domain. Just as 
obvious as the sunrise, soon enough the issue will be too many numbers. 
 Sensors, radios, and AI, oh my.
Security metrics study is possibly out in front of some other fields, but only so much and 
likely not even that for much longer. The idea that managing a risk requires measuring that 
risk or its precursors has long since become standard operational thinking in the security 
game, yet we are living proof that while collecting numbers is necessary, it is not sufficient to 
deliver security.
Some would argue that it isn’t our tools and our scorekeeping (with numbers) that is the 
“thing” that is not sufficient—rather, it is incentives that are wrong. Whole conferences are 
on this topic, and there is no way to summarize them in the context of this column, but study 
of, and suggestions for, incentive structures, be they rewarding or punishing, are surely need -
ful. As an example, the organizers of the Code Conference (CodeCon) said, “[For] 2018, we 
invited the people in charge of enforcing regulations, and those creating new ones.” That’s a 
stab at incentive structures to be sure, but let’s specifically look at some numbers from Mary 
Meeker’s “Internet Trends 2018” slide deck at CodeCon, beginning with Slide 99 [1].For Good Measure
Numbers Are Where You Find Them
DAN GEER
Dan Geer is the CISO for  
In-Q-Tel and a security 
researcher with a quantitative 
bent. He has a long history 
with the USENIX Association, 
including officer positions, program 
committees, etc.  dan@geer.org
Content initiatives, Slide 99
Note the role of algorithms in the above, which, for the purpose of this column, we will take 
as a form of security metrics even if the algorithms in question are not open for inspection. 
Algorithms as censors is a worthy topic in its own right.
With Google/YouTube, that 81% were flagged by algorithms presumably means that the 
average Content Moderator sees those algorithms as automated assistance to making faster www.usenix.org   FALL 2018   VOL. 43, NO. 3  55
COLUMNS
For Good Measure: Numbers Are Where You Find Themdecisions. A month before Meeker’s speech, The Guardian  [2] 
said this about the algorithms, per se:
Those systems broadly work in one of three ways: some 
use an algorithm to fingerprint inappropriate footage 
and then match it to future uploads; others track 
suspicious patterns of uploads, which is particularly 
useful for spam detection. A third set of systems use 
the company’s machine learning technology to identify 
videos that breach guidelines based on their similarity 
to previous videos. The machine learning system used 
to identify violent extremist content, for instance, was 
trained on 2 million hand-reviewed videos.
While machine learning catches many videos, YouTube 
still lets individuals flag videos. Members of the 
public can mark any video as breaching community 
guidelines. There is also a group of individuals and 
150 organisations who are “trusted flaggers”—experts 
in various areas of contested content who are given 
special tools to highlight problematic videos. Regular 
users flag 95% of the videos that aren’t caught by the 
automatic detection, while trusted flaggers provide 
the other 5%. But the success rates are reversed, with 
reports from trusted flaggers leading to 14% of the 
removals on the site, and regular users just 5%.
Facebook’s use of algorithms is undoubtedly similar to that of 
Google/YouTube. 
But measurement is not a problem just for us here in security 
metrics land; take something as important as economics. Every -
one knows something about the Consumer Price Index (CPI). 
As Wikipedia puts it, “In most countries, the CPI, along with the 
population census, is one of the most closely watched national 
economic statistics.” Yet even the calculation of the CPI is hav -
ing trouble these days, as Slide 111 shows.Think of the spread of things that the CPI is baked into, from 
labor contracts to entitlements to financial instruments to you-
name-it. Surely the CPI is easier to measure than security, but 
here we are.
Of course, everyone knows that the world is creating lots of data. 
Defining “structured” data as “data that has been organized so 
that it is easily searchable and includes metadata and machine-
to-machine (M2M) data,” we have (by way of the market intel -
ligence firm IDC) the curve you  see in Slide 189.
For those of us working in data protection, the message is obvi -
ous—data protection must be automated; the algorithms have 
to make the “kill decisions.” And other algorithms will have 
to summarize things for us, summaries that will be ever more 
distant from the raw numbers. 
Putting aside the argument over whether security and privacy 
are mutually supportive or fundamentally at odds, Slide 206 has 
a few somewhat encouraging numbers that consumers are at 
least thinking about it:
On the other hand, trading short-term gain for long-term risk is 
still blithely popular, but, as measured by the German marketing 
firm GfK, blitheness is culturally diverse—see Slide 223.
That one slide, Slide 223, probably says more than we know how 
to evaluate both as to privacy (the question GfK actually inves -
tigated) and to security (as in risk/benefit tradeoffs generally). 
Later on (Slide 266), the founder of Slack hits the nail on the 
head: “When you want something really bad, you will put up with 
a lot of flaws.” We, the global “we,” want our toys ever harder, 
ever faster. There’ve been a lot of demonstrations of that phe -
nomenon, but let’s use The Economist ’s numbers in Table 1 [3].
To get adoption rates accelerating like that a lot of flaws must 
be put up with, security flaws in particular, one might presume, 
Online prices are falling, Slide 111 Projection of global information creation, Slide 18956   FALL 2018   VOL. 43, NO. 3  www.usenix.org
COLUMNS
For Good Measure: Numbers Are Where You Find Themsince security is so generally a feature worth adding only after 
there is good consumer uptake.
So where does this get us? It is not as if anyone needs to be told 
that things are changing faster than we understand. It is not 
as if the present author’s selected numbers from the “Internet 
Trends Report” are unbelievable individually, but collectively 
they predict a world where prediction (as we humans under -
stand the term) is less and less possible because of the number 
of moving parts, their opacity, their interdependence, their 
cardinality, their specificity of purpose, their autonomy, their 
speed. Clausewitz would no doubt call this a deepening fog of 
war. Modern military doctrine trades off precision and certainty 
for speed and agility, or, as Army Chief of Staff Gen. Mark Milley 
says [4], “On the future battlefield, if you stay in one place longer 
than two or three hours, you will be dead.” Is that not the future 
of cybersecurity in a nutshell?
References
[1] M. Meeker, “Internet Trends 2018”: http://www.kpcb.com  
/file/2018-internet-trends-report .
[2] A. Hern, “YouTube Reveals It Removed 8.3m Videos from 
Site in Three Months,” The Guardian , April 23, 2018: ht t p s: //  
www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/apr/24/youtube  
-reveals-it-removed-83m-videos-from-site-in-three-months . [3] “Happy Birthday World Wide Web,” The Economist , March 
12, 2014: https:/ /www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2014/03  
/12/happy-birthday-world-wide-web . 
[4] S. Freedberg, Jr., “Miserable, Disobedient and Victorious: 
Gen. Milley’s Future US Soldier,” Breaking Defense , October 
5, 2016: https://breakingdefense.com/2016/10/miserable  
-disobedient-victorious-gen-milleys-future-us-soldier/ .How consumers address data privacy concerns, Slide 206 Willingness to share data by country, Slide 223
Years until used by one-quarter of American 
population
46 Electricity
35 Telephone
31 Radio
26 Television
16 Personal Computer
13 Mobile Phone
7 The Web
Table 1: Technology adoption
